Information for you
Published in March 2018



Managing premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
About this information
This information is for you if you have, or think you have, premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and want to
know more about it. It may also be helpful if you are a partner, relative or friend of someone who is
affected by PMS.
A glossary of all medical terms used is available on the RCOG website at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/
medical-terms.


   Key points
      •    PMS is the name given to the physical and emotional symptoms affecting your daily life in
           the 2 weeks before you have your period. These symptoms usually get better once your
           period starts.
      •    You should record your symptoms in a diary over two menstrual cycles in a row to help your
           healthcare professional make a diagnosis.
      •    There is a wide range of options to help manage your symptoms and allow you to get on with
           your daily life.
      •    Whatever option you choose, continue to keep a diary of your symptoms for at least another
            2–3 months, as this can help to see whether a particular treatment is working.



What is PMS?
PMS is the name given to the physical and emotional symptoms affecting your daily
life in the 2 weeks before you have your period. These symptoms usually get
better once your period starts and often disappear by the end of your period.




                                                     1
Nearly all women have some premenstrual symptoms. Each woman’s symptoms are different, but the most
common include:

    •   mood swings
    •   feeling depressed, irritable or bad-tempered
    •   feeling upset, anxious or emotional
    •   tiredness or having trouble sleeping
    •   headaches
    •   changes in appetite and food cravings
    •   feeling clumsy
    •   fluid retention and feeling bloated
    •   changes to skin or hair
    •   sore or tender breasts.
Symptoms can vary from month to month, although they tend to form a pattern over time.
Between 2 and 4 in 100 women get PMS that is severe enough to prevent them from getting on with their
daily lives. A very small number of women get an even more intense form of PMS known as premenstrual
dysphoric disorder (PMDD), which is not covered in this information. If you have questions about this, you
should discuss it with your healthcare professional and see the Further information section below.

What causes PMS?
The exact cause of PMS is not known. It could be linked to changes in the levels of your hormones and
body chemicals.
The levels of your hormones change during your menstrual cycle. Some women are more sensitive to these
hormonal changes, which can lead to the symptoms described. Women who use some forms of hormonal
contraception are less affected by PMS. PMS has also been linked to a variety of chemical substances in
your blood called neurotransmitters, such as serotonin and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA).

How do I know I have PMS?
If you are getting symptoms, you should write them down in a diary for at least two menstrual cycles in a
row. Your healthcare professional will then review your diary with you to see whether your symptoms fit
the pattern of PMS.
If your symptom diary alone is not enough for diagnosis, you may be offered treatment with gonadotrophin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues for a period of 3 months. This will temporarily stop your ovaries
producing hormones, which may help with your diagnosis.

What are my options?
There is a wide range of options to help you to manage your symptoms and allow you to get on with your
daily life. Your healthcare professional will discuss these with you.
Whatever option you choose, you will be advised to continue to keep a diary of your symptoms for at least
another 2–3 months, as this can help to see whether a particular treatment is working.




                                                       2
Lifestyle changes
In the first instance, you can take some positive steps to try to improve your symptoms by:

    •   doing more exercise
    •   eating a healthy balanced diet – The NHS Choices website at www.nhs.uk/Livewell/healthy-
        eating/Pages/Healthyeating.aspx can provide more information about a healthy diet
    •   trying to reduce and manage stress, for example by using meditation, yoga and mindfulness.
Speak with your healthcare professional if you would like further information about ways to change your
lifestyle and about treatments that can help.

Psychological support and therapy
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is known to help PMS symptoms and should be offered to you as a
treatment option. This involves discussing your symptoms with a therapist. It can help you learn new ways
of managing some of your symptoms to reduce their impact on your daily life.

Complementary therapy
There are several alternative or complementary therapies for PMS. Many women find these helpful,
although there is little evidence to show that they are effective.
You should inform your healthcare professional if you are taking any medicine or supplement. This is
because some complementary therapies may react with other medicines.
Supplements of calcium, vitamin D, Vitex agnus-castus (a herb known as chasteberry) or Ginkgo biloba may
be helpful. Evening primrose oil can reduce breast tenderness.

Medical treatment
Non-hormonal
    •   Two types of antidepressant medications have been shown to help PMS symptoms, namely selective
        serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).
             {{ Antidepressants should only be prescribed by a healthcare professional. These can be

                  taken on a daily basis for 2 weeks before your period or all the way through your cycle.
             {{ Side effects may include nausea (feeling sick), insomnia (difficulty sleeping), tiredness and

                  low libido (not being interested in having sex).
             {{ SSRIs are recommended as one of the first-choice treatments for severe PMS.

             {{ If you choose to stop taking antidepressants, it is important that you do so gradually so

                  that you do not get withdrawal symptoms, such as headaches. Your healthcare team will
                  advise you.
    •   If you are planning a pregnancy or if you get pregnant, you should talk to your healthcare
        professional before stopping any medication.
    •   Water tablets (diuretics) such as spironolactone may help some women with some physical
        symptoms of PMS.




                                                     3
Hormonal
Combined oral contraceptive pill
Some women find using the combined oral contraceptive pill helps with PMS symptoms. Newer types
of contraceptive pills containing a progestogen called drospirenone have been shown to improve PMS
symptoms. These are considered as first-choice treatments. You may be advised to take these pills
continuously, without a break, for better symptom control.

Estrogen hormone patches or gel
    •   Using estrogen hormone patches or gel can improve the physical and psychological symptoms
        of PMS.
    •   Unless you have had a hysterectomy (removal of your uterus), estrogen hormone patches or gel
        must be used in combination with a low dose of the hormone progestogen to prevent abnormal
        thickening of the lining of your womb. Progestogens may be given in the form of tablets (taken for
        a minimum of 10 days each month), pessaries or a hormone-containing coil.
    •   Estrogen hormone patches or gel do not work as a contraceptive and so you will still need to use
        a method of birth control.

Danazol
    •   Danazol (a synthetic hormone) in low doses can sometimes be used in the second half of your
        menstrual cycle to reduce breast tenderness. However, your healthcare professional should discuss
        with you the potential permanent side effects, such as deepening of your voice and enlargement of
        your clitoris.
    •   It is important to use contraception while using danazol because it can affect the development of a
        female baby in the uterus.

Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues
    •   GnRH analogues may be recommended if you have severe PMS symptoms and when other
        treatments have not worked or are not suitable. These may also be used to help reach a diagnosis
        in some women, as mentioned in the How do I know I have PMS? section above.
    •   These medicines cause a temporary and reversible menopause, so you will not release eggs and
        you will not have any periods.
    •   If you use GnRH analogues for more than 6 months, it may affect your bone strength
        (osteoporosis). You will be advised to take hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to protect your
        bones and reduce your menopausal symptoms, such as hot flushes.
    •   You will be advised to have regular bone density scans to check for osteoporosis if you use this
        treatment for more than 2 years.
    •   You should also make sure that you get regular exercise, have a balanced diet and do not smoke.

Surgical treatment
    •   Your healthcare professional will only suggest surgical treatment if you have severe symptoms and
        all other treatments have not helped.
    •   Removal of your uterus along with both ovaries and fallopian tubes can help to improve severe
        PMS symptoms by making you menopausal.
    •   If you have surgical treatment for PMS, you may be advised to use HRT to prevent menopausal
        symptoms. If your uterus and ovaries have been removed, this will be estrogen-only HRT. If
        you still have your uterus, you will need both estrogen and progestogen. Progestogens protect

                                                    4
         the lining of your uterus, but may then re-introduce symptoms of PMS. See the RCOG patient
         information Treatment for symptoms of the menopause, which is available at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/
         patients/patient-leaflets/treatment-symptoms-menopause/.
     •   If you are considering surgical treatment, your healthcare professional will advise you to use GnRH
         analogues and HRT for 3–6 months before surgery. GnRH analogues have a similar effect on your
         hormones as having your ovaries removed and will give you an idea of how you may feel after the
         operation. You may also be able to see whether you will benefit from surgery and whether HRT
         suits you.
     •   Surgical treatment such as endometrial ablation or hysterectomy without removal of both
         ovaries is not recommended for treatment of PMS. See the RCOG patient information
         Laparoscopic hysterectomy (www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/laparoscopic-hysterectomy),
         Vaginal hysterectomy (www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/vaginal-hysterectomy),
         Abdominal hysterectomy (www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/abdominal-hysterectomy) and
         Endometrial ablation (www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/endometrial-ablation).

At what stage of treatment should I be referred to a
gynaecologist?
If simple measures such as combined pills or SSRIs have not worked, your GP will refer you to a specialist.
A team of healthcare professionals may be involved in your care, including your GP, a nurse specialist, a
dietician, a mental health professional (psychiatrist, clinical psychologist or counsellor) and a gynaecologist.
The make-up of the team will depend on the hospital you attend.

Further information
PMS is common and many women are affected by its symptoms. Treatment, information and support are
available to enable you to manage your symptoms.
National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome (NAPS): www.pms.org.uk
Women’s Health Concern (WHC), the patient arm of the British Menopause Society (BMS):
www.womens-health-concern.org
NHS Choices – Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD): www.nhs.uk/conditions/pre-menstrual-
syndrome/symptoms/#premenstrual-dysphoric-disorder-pmdd
Mind – Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD): www.mind.org.uk/information-support/types-of-
mental-health-problems/premenstrual-dysphoric-disorder-pmdd/#
RCOG patient information Treatment for symptoms of the menopause: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-
leaflets/treatment-symptoms-menopause/
RCOG patient information Laparoscopic hysterectomy: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/
laparoscopic-hysterectomy
RCOG patient information Vaginal hysterectomy: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/vaginal-
hysterectomy
RCOG patient information Abdominal hysterectomy: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/
abdominal-hysterectomy
RCOG patient information Endometrial ablation: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/patient-leaflets/endometrial-
ablation
A full list of useful organisations is available on the RCOG website at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/patients/other-
sources-of-help

                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                   discussion to consider options,      They wa

  Shared Decision                                                                                                          Ask 3
       •      to choose between different types                                                                                                    risks and benefits and then          what is im
              of treatment                                                                                                                         making a shared decision."


  Making                                                                                                                  Questions
                                                                                                                                                                                        Giving y
Making a choice
       •      if you want to continue with the                                                                                                                                          question
              same treatment                                                                                                                                                            importan
                                                                                                                                                              GP, Oldham
                                                                                                                                                                                        them to
        Whatwith
     Working  you  choose
                 the          toprogramme
                     Right Care  do should                      depend on what
                                                                                                                                What are my options?                                    the best

                                                                                                                                                  “I asked
     to is important
        promote sharedto you. making
                       decision
     between patients and professionals.                                                                                                                                                healthca
                                                                                                                                                  What are the pros and cons
       If you are asked to make a choice, you may have lots of questions
                                                                                                                                                   3 Questions...”
                                                                                                of each option for me?
       that you want to ask. You may also want to talk over your options
       with your family or friends. It can help to write a list of the questions How do I get support to
       you want answered and take it to your appointment.                                                                                                                                "Throug
                                                                                help me make aHere   are some people who
                                                                                                 decision
                                                                                                                                                                                         I have
                                                                                                                                                       found
                                                                                                                                        that is right for me?it helpful to get the       to find
           Ask 3 Questions                                                                                                                           answers to the 3 Questions.
                                                                                                                                                                                         availa
                                                                                                                                                                                         By find
           To begin with, try to make sure you get the answers to three key
                                                                                                                                                   “Knowing the possible side-effects    option
           questions if you are asked to make a choice about your healthcare.
                                                                                                                                                   of the different medications I        decide
                                                                                                                                                   could take meant I could weigh        my val
           1. What are my options?
                                                                                                                                                   up the pros and cons of each
           2. What are the pros and cons of each option for me?
                                                                                                                                                   one, and knowing the risks meant
           3. How do I get support to help me make a decision that is right
                                                                                                                                                    I made the right decision.”
              for me?

      *  Ask 3 Questions is based on Shepherd HL, et al. Three questions that patients can ask to improve the quality of information
        physicians give about treatment options: A cross-over trial. Patient Education and Counselling, 2011;84: 379-85
      Your health, Your decision                                                                                                                                    Renal Patient


                                                                                                      https://www.aquanw.nhs.uk/SDM
                                                                                                                                       What’s it all about?


Sources and acknowledgements
This information has been developed by the RCOG Patient Information Committee. It is based on the RCOG
Green-top Guideline No. 48, Management of Premenstrual Syndrome. The guideline contains a full list of the
sources of evidence we have used. You can find it online at: www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/
guidelines/gtg48.
This information was reviewed before publication by women attending clinics in London, Manchester and
Shrewsbury, by the RCOG Women’s Network and by the RCOG Women’s Voices Involvement Panel.




                                              © Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2018

                                                                                                          6
