POCKET GUIDE
 MENOPAUSE
MANAGEMENT
  A practical tool for
  healthcare professionals
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction --------------------------------------------------------------1

Impact of Menopause -------------------------------------------------5

Essentials of Management -----------------------------------------13

Choosing Therapy -----------------------------------------------------17

Hormone Therapy and Cancer -------------------------------------20

When to Refer ---------------------------------------------------------25

Troubleshooting -------------------------------------------------------28

Special Considerations ---------------------------------------------- 33

Complementary and Alternative Medicine ---------------------40

Abbreviations ----------------------------------------------------------42

Tables 1-5 for HT Products in Canada -----------------------------43

Tables 6-7 for Non-hormonal Medications ----------------------48

Acknowledgements ---------------------------------------------------50
INTRODUCTION
The menopausal transition can be a time of significant disrup-
tion and stress for women. Symptoms associated with meno-
pause may have a major effect on a woman’s quality of life.
Providing safe and effective management of these symptoms,
and mitigating potential health risks in the postmenopausal
years, are critical roles for health care providers.

In this pocket guide we summarize the recommendations
made in the guidelines for management published by four
professional associations: the Society of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC 2014), the International
Menopause Society (IMS 2016), the North American Meno-
pause Society (NAMS 2017), and the Endocrine Society (ES
2015).

•   The publication of the report on the combined estrogen-
    progestin arm of the Women’s Health Initiative in 2002
    led to great uncertainty about the management of meno-
    pausal women. The report caused a media firestorm
    because it concluded that use of conjugated estrogens
    and medroxyprogesterone acetate in postmenopausal
    women was associated with increased risks of breast can-
    cer, coronary heart disease, and stroke. Use of hormone
    therapy in postmenopausal women was largely aban-
    doned in the years that followed.

                                                              1
INTRODUCTION (CONT.)
•   Reanalysis of the results of this study, and subsequent
    publication of the results of the WHI estrogen-only study,
    suggested that the initial negative response to the WHI
    findings was ex-cessive. It is critical to note that the WHI
    hormone therapy studies were not designed to assess
    the risks of hormone therapy in symptomatic women.
    Instead, they were designed to find out whether the ben-
    efits of hormone therapy seen in observational studies
    of younger menopausal women (chiefly cardiac benefits)
    applied to older women as well. As it turned out, they did
    not.

•   In general, hormone therapy in postmenopausal women
    should only be initiated in women < 60 years of age or <
    10 years past menopause.

Indications for hormone therapy
• All four guidelines advise that hormone therapy (estro-
    gen plus progestogen in women with a uterus, estrogen
    alone in women without a uterus) is the most effective
    treatment for bothersome vasomotor symptoms, with or
    without additional climacteric symptoms, in menopausal
    women.

•   The NAMS statement also notes that hormone therapy is
    approved by the United States FDA for four indications:
2
INTRODUCTION (CONT.)
    bothersome VMS; prevention of bone loss; hypoestrogen-
    ism caused by hypogonadism, castration, or premature
    ovarian insufficiency; and genitourinary symptoms.

Choice of treatment
• The guidelines agree that MHT must be individualized and
   tailored according to each woman’s symptoms, her need
   for disease prevention, her personal and family history,
   the results of relevant investigations, and her own prefer-
   ences and expectations. The choice of treatment should
   be reassessed periodically.

Dosing
• The guidelines acknowledge that in choosing a dose for
   MHT, the “appropriate” dose is one which minimizes
   risk while still providing benefit. For older women, lower
   doses reduce cardiovascular risk.

•   For women at higher risk of venous thromboembolism a
    non-oral form of estrogen at the lowest effective dose is
    recommended.

•   In women with a uterus, the proliferative effects of sys-
    temic estrogen on the endometrium must be countered
    by an appropriate dose of progestogen (or a SERM, in the
    case of the TSEC).
                                                                3
INTRODUCTION (CONT.)
Duration of treatment
• The guidelines agree that the duration of MHT for women
   should be individualized, because long-term follow-up
   data regarding use of MHT and risk are complicated.
   This individualization should take into account the level
   of symptom control and effect on quality of life, and a
   woman’s individual risk of cancer, coronary heart disease,
   and venous thromboembolism.

•   Each guideline recommended that the decision to contin-
    ue MHT be revisited at least annually. There appear to be
    no reasons to place mandatory limitations on the duration
    of MHT.

•   Longer duration courses of estrogen-alone therapy (ET)
    may be more appropriate because of the more favourable
    risk profile.

•   The guidelines also universally recommended that women
    who undergo early menopause (before age 45) be advised
    to use hormone therapy, at least until the average age of
    menopause. This is because of proven health benefits for
    menopause symptoms, prevention of bone loss, cogni-
    tion and mood issues, and (in observational studies) heart
    disease.

4
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE
Vasomotor symptoms (VMS)
• Vasomotor symptoms (hot flashes and night sweats)
   are a common reason for women to seek medical atten-
   tion. 60-80% of women will experience VMS during the
   menopausal transition. Although the exact physiology of
   VMS is not well understood, they are thought to repre-
   sent altered thermoregulatory functioning, possibly due
   to alterations in reproductive hormones. Hypothalamic
   activity of norepinephrine, serotonin, and neurokinin 3
   may be involved.

•   VMS are associated with physiologic circulatory changes,
    with initial vasodilatation followed by vasoconstriction.

•   Although 50% of women experience VMS for 7 years or
    less, 15% may experience VMS for 15 years or longer.

•   VMS are associated with diminished sleep quality, irrita-
    bility, difficulty concentrating, and reduced quality of life,
    as well as poorer health status. Women with VMS have
    less favourable markers of CV health than those without
    VMS, and may have an increased risk of developing coro-
    nary heart disease.

•   Menopausal hormone therapy (systemic estrogen alone,
    or with appropriate endometrial protection in women
                                                                     5
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
    with a uterus) is the current standard therapy for reduc-
    tion of VMS. Use of a progestogen alone may be effective
    in treating VMS,but the safety of long term use has not
    been established. For those with contraindications to
    hormone therapy or a desire to avoid it, SSRI/SNRIs,
    gabapentinoids, or clonidine may reduce VMS in some
    women.

•   When MHT is discontinued, vasomotor symptoms return
    in approximately 50% of women, irrespective of years
    since menopause or duration of MHT use. There is no
    consensus about whether stopping MHT “cold turkey” or
    tapering is preferable.

Mood and Cognition
• Depressive symptoms increase during the menopause
  transition (as opposed to older age and younger age
  groups), as does the risk for clinical depression.

•   The following may influence or mediate the risk for de-
    pression during the transitional years: the presence and
    severity of VMS (hot flashes, night sweats), the occur-
    rence of stressful life events, sleep problems, a history of
    depression, and, most importantly, a history of reproduc-
    tive-related mood sensitivity (premenstrual dysphoric

6
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
    disorder, postpartum depression, or mood alterations
    during pregnancy). There is currently insufficient evi-
    dence to support the use of MHT as an adjunct in
    the treatment of depression.

•   Forgetfulness, trouble concentrating, and other mild cog-
    nitive symptoms are common during midlife. Three large
    RCTs showed neutral effects of MHT on cognitive function
    when initiated early in the postmenopausal period.

•   Observational studies have found associations between
    early initiation of MHT and a reduced risk of developing
    Alzheimer’s disease. Studies involving women experi-
    encing early surgical menopause suggest that estrogen
    therapy improves cognitive function.

•   Women who initiated MHT after the age of 65 years
    showed impairment in memory and increased risk of
    dementia. Women in the pre-clinical stages of dementia
    may be the most vulnerable cognitively to an adverse
    effect of MHT.

Osteoporosis and Somatic Symptoms
• Postmenopausal osteoporosis results from a failure to
    attain peak bone density, accelerated bone loss after
    menopause, age-related bone loss, or a combination of
    factors.                                              7
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
•   Accelerated postmenopausal bone loss is induced by es-
    trogen deprivation. The 10-year probability of a fracture
    in an individual can be estimated using a model such as
    FRAX or CAROC, which integrates various risk factors. In-
    tervention thresholds for therapy can be based on 10-year
    fracture probability. Lifestyle changes should be part of
    treatment strategy. The choice of pharmacologic therapy
    should be based on a balance of effectiveness, risk and
    cost.

•   Therapeutic options include MHT (in appropriately se-
    lected patients), bisphosphonates, SERMs (raloxifene),
    RANK-ligand inhibitors (denosumab), or parathyroid hor-
    mone (teriparatide).

•   Standard dose ET and MHT (estrogen plus appropri-
    ate endometrial protection) prevent bone loss in most
    healthy postmenopausal women through inhibition of
    bone resorption and a reduced rate of bone remodelling
    mediated through the RANK/RANK-ligand interaction.

•   RCTs and observational studies show that standard-dose
    ET and MHT reduce the incidence of osteoporotic frac-
    tures, including spine, hip and all non-spine fractures, in
    postmenopausal women, even those without osteoporo-

8
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
    sis. MHT is the most appropriate therapy for fracture
    prevention in the early menopause.

•   Unless there is a contraindication, administration of ET,
    MHT, or oral contraceptives is optimal for reducing the
    risk of osteoporosis in women with premature or early
    menopause, rather than other bone-specific agents.

•   Osteoarthritis increases in prevalence after menopause.
    There is evidence for a beneficial effect of endogenous
    and exoge-nous estrogens on joint health. Women in the
    CEE-alone arm of the WHI had significantly fewer hip and
    knee joint replacements than those in the placebo arm.

Cardiovascular Disease

•   Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of morbidity
    and mortality in postmenopausal women.

•   Primary prevention strategies include smoking cessation,
    weight loss, blood pressure control, regular aerobic exer-
    cise, and diabetes and lipid control. Use of low-dose ASA
    and/or statins does not reduce the risk of coronary heart
    disease, cardiovascular mortality, or all-cause mortality in
    women.

                                                                9
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
•    Estrogen therapy initiated at the time of menopause is
     likely cardioprotective. In the WHI, the hazard ratio for
     coronary heart disease in women who initiated MHT ≤10
     years after menopause was 0.50.

•    Initiation of MHT > 10 years after menopause or after age
     60 is associated with increased risk.

•    Use of MHT for primary prevention of cardiovascular
     disease is not supported in any guideline. Women at high
     risk of cardiovascular events should be offered non-hor-
     monal management of menopausal symptoms. Women
     at moderate risk of cardiovascular events, if offered MHT,
     should preferentially use transdermal estrogen rather
     than oral. Use of micronized progesterone is preferable in
     higher risk women who require endometrial protection.

•    In a Cochrane review, women who initiated oral MHT at <
     60 years of age or within 10 years of menopause did not
     have an increased risk of stroke but women who initiated
     MHT at ≥60 years of age or > 10 years after menopause
     did have an increased risk.

Genitourinary Syndrome of Menopause
• Genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM) encom-

10
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
    passes the genital and lower urinary tract symptoms as-
    sociated with postmenopausal estrogen deficiency. Symp-
    toms may include genital dryness, burning and irritation;
    sexual symptoms of diminished lubrication and pain dur-
    ing sexual activity; and urinary symptoms of urgency,
    dysuria, and recurrent urinary tract infections.

•   Low-dose vaginal estrogen preparations are safe and
    effective treatments for vulvovaginal symptoms due to
    estrogen deficiency.

•   Because GSM symptoms often worsen with age and time
    since menopause, long-term low-dose vaginal estrogen
    therapy may be necessary. Concomitant use of an endo-
    metrial protective agent with low-dose vaginal estrogen
    therapy is not required, but any woman who has vaginal
    bleeding should be thoroughly investigated. Endometrial
    safety data with use of vaginal estrogens beyond one
    year are not available.

•   Women in whom vaginal estrogens are contraindicated,
    or who do not wish to use vaginal estrogen, may have
    relief of pain during intercourse with the use of vaginal
    lubricants prior to intercourse. Vaginal moisturizers or
    vaginal hyaluronic acid therapies may help with vaginal
    dryness and pain with intercourse, but do not restore
                                                                11
IMPACT OF MENOPAUSE (CONT.)
     normal anatomy and function.

•    Low- dose vaginal estrogen therapy may provide benefit
     for urinary symptoms, including over-active bladder and
     urge incontinence, and may aid in prevention of recurrent
     urinary tract infections.

•    Symptoms of vulvovaginal atrophy are strongly associated
     with sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women. Low-
     dose vaginal estrogen improves sexual function in these
     women.

•    As there is minimal systemic absorption, the standard
     contraindications for systemic hormone therapy do not
     apply to vaginal estrogen therapy.

•    Use of vaginal estrogens is not contraindicated in women
     with a past history of breast cancer, but consultation with
     their oncologist is recommended. In women with current
     breast cancer who are being treated with an aromatase
     inhibitor, the decision to use low-dose vaginal estrogen
     should be made, in consultation with their oncologist,
     only after non-hormonal methods have been unsuccessful
     in relieving symptoms.


12
ESSENTIALS OF MANAGEMENT
Vasomotor symptoms

Mild hot flashes: lifestyle strategies only
  - keeping core body temperature cool: (light clothes, air
      conditioning, ventilation)
  - participating in regular exercise
  - avoiding alcohol intake and cigarette smoking
  - following a healthy diet
  - behavioural modification (avoid stressful situations)

Moderate to severe hot flashes: MHT is the gold standard
and best therapy for reduction of VMS (Tables 1-5), followed
by non-hormonal prescription medications (Tables 6, 7) as a
second choice. Cognitive behavioural therapy may be helpful.
If these strategies are ineffective or unacceptable, comple-
mentary and alternative medicine may be used, although
efficacy is unproven.

Hormone therapy
• Women without a uterus can use systemic estrogen-
   alone therapy (ET).

•   Women with a uterus can use either systemic estrogen
    combined with a progestogen (EPT) or the tissue-selec-
    tive estrogen complex (conjugated equine estrogens and
    bazedoxifene).
                                                              13
ESSENTIALS OF MANAGEMENT (CONT.)
•        Combined low-dose oral contraceptives can be used in
         perimenopausal women.

•        Progestogens alone may be used in women with contrain-
         dications to estrogen therapy.

Contraindications to HT
         Estrogens
     -      unexplained vaginal bleeding
     -      acute liver dysfunction
     -      estrogen-dependent cancer
     -      coronary heart disease
     -      previous history of stroke
     -      history of thromboembolic disease
     -      starting treatment after 60 years of age or after 10
            years post-menopause (relative)

         Progestogens
     -      unexplained vaginal bleeding
     -      breast cancer
     -      hypersensitivity to peanuts /peanut oil (used in
            some preparations of micronized progesterone)




14
ESSENTIALS OF MANAGEMENT (CONT.)
Complementary and alternative medicine options

•    Non-prescription remedies: natural health products
    -  phytoestrogens: soy foods, red clover, isoflavone
       supplements, flaxseed
    - black cohosh
    - dong quai
    - evening primrose oil
    - ginseng
    - ginko

•       Acupuncture


Urogenital Health


•    Systemic MHT for treatment of VMS is usually sufficient
     to relieve symptoms; other options can be added to
     systemic MHT or used alone
    - Maintain sexual activity
    - Lubricants
         - water-based
         - silicone-based



                                                               15
ESSENTIALS OF MANAGEMENT (CONT.)
     -   Moisturisers
             - hyaluronic acid
              - adhesive polycarbophil polymer
     -   Low-dose vaginal estrogens (no progestogen required)
              - tablets
              - creams
              - ring
     -   DHEA vaginal insert (available in USA and Europe;
         awaiting Health Canada approval in Canada)

Osteoporosis

•  Weight-bearing and high impact exercise (brisk walking,
   climbing stairs, dancing, etc)
• Nutrition and supplements
  - calcium: 1200 mg of daily intake combination of diet
      and supplements, preferably mostly from diet (i.e., 3
      servings of milk/dairy)
  - vitamin D: over 50 years of age: 800-2000 IU daily
• Hormone therapy (ET or EPT)
• Bisphosphonates
  - oral alendronate (daily, weekly), risedronate (daily,
      weekly, monthly)
  - zoledronic acid (yearly IV)


16
ESSENTIALS OF MANAGEMENT (CONT.)
•    RANKL inhibitor
    - denosumab (subcutaneous injection every 6 months)

•    Parathyroid hormone therapy (PTH)
    - teriparatide (daily subcutaneous injection)

•       Selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)
    -      raloxifene (oral)


CHOOSING THERAPY
Clinical indications for initiation of systemic MHT
• Vasomotor symptoms and night sweats

•       Prevention of bone loss

•       Reduction in fracture risk in women at increased risk of
        osteoporosis or fracture

•       Early menopause (< age 45) or premature ovarian insuf-
        ficiency

•       Sleep disturbance

•       Depressive symptoms: ET may be beneficial during or
        shortly after the menopause transition                     17
CHOOSING THERAPY (CONT.)
Therapeutic goal: in each woman, to choose the optimal
therapy that will alleviate symptoms with minimal side
effects

•    The appropriate initial choice of therapy is the first step in
     preventing problems.

•    Choice of therapy will depend on any contraindications,
     the woman’s symptoms, age, time since menopause,
     medical risks, family history, personal preferences, and
     insurance coverage for medications.

Therapeutic options for systemic MHT (Tables 1-5)
• Estrogen alone in women without a uterus

•    Estrogen and progestogen for women with a uterus

•    Systemic estrogen options: oral tablets, transdermal
     patches and transdermal gels

•    Progestogens: oral tablets, transdermal patch (combined
     with estrogen) or intrauterine system

•    Schedules: continuous estrogen and progestogen, con-
     tinuous estrogen and cyclical progestogen (10-14 days/
     month)
18
CHOOSING THERAPY (CONT.)
•   TSEC (tissue selective estrogen complex) containing con-
    jugated equine estrogen and bazedoxifene, a selective
    estrogen receptor modulator

General principles

•   Higher doses of estrogen require higher doses of pro-
    gestogens for endometrial protection, and higher doses
    result in more side effects.

•   Younger women (premature ovarian insufficiency) re-
    quire higher estrogen doses for bone protection.

•   Lower doses of estrogen and progestogen reduce breast
    discomfort and vaginal bleeding.

Regimen Decisions

•   Symptomatic perimenopausal women (i.e., with con-
    tinuing menstrual cycles) will have less unscheduled
    bleeding with use of oral contraceptives, estrogen with a
    progestin-releasing IUS, or estrogen with cyclical proges-
    togen.

•   Cyclical progestogen therapy usually produces regular
    withdrawal bleeding.
                                                                 19
CHOOSING THERAPY (CONT.)
•   Continuous progestogen therapy in a postmenopausal
    woman usually results in amenorrhea after several
    months.

Route of Administration
• Transdermal estrogen therapy may be preferable for
   women who are smokers or have migraine headaches,
   hypertriglyceridemia, malabsorption syndromes, hetero-
   zygous carriers of Leiden Factor V mutation, a history of
   thrombosis (on anti-coagulation), metabolic syndrome,
   and hypertension.

HORMONE THERAPY AND CANCER
MHT and Breast Cancer
In women, mortality from breast cancer is far less than from
cardiovascular disease.

•   ET (for women without a uterus) has minimal effect on
    the risk of breast cancer. Observational studies suggest a
    small increase in risk on long term ET. In the WHI, CEE-on-
    ly therapy resulted in a significantly reduced risk of breast
    cancer.

•  EPT (CEE+MPA) in both observational studies and the WHI
   resulted in a small increase in breast cancer risk after 5
20
   years of use (the absolute risk is very small). Women using
HORMONE THERAPY AND CANCER (CONT.)
    EPT for the first time showed no increase in breast
    cancer incidence. In the WHI, EPT accounted for less
    than 1 additional breast cancer diagnosis per 1,000
    women per year of use.

•   Different progestogens may exert different effects on the
    breast, but there is no conclusive evidence to suggest a
    differential effect on breast cancer risk.

•   The recently introduced TSEC combines estrogen (CEE)
    with a second agent (bazedoxifene) that blocks any
    stimulatory effect on the breast. Longer term data on
    whether this will reduce or eliminate breast cancer risk
    are not yet available.

Family History of Breast Cancer
• There is a marginal increase in personal risk with a single
   relative who develops breast cancer after menopause.

•   A woman with two first-degree relatives who develop
    breast cancer after age 50 or one first-degree relative
    who develops breast cancer before age 50 has approxi-
    mately double the lifetime risk.

•   Lifetime risk quadruples in women with two first-degree
    relatives affected before age 50 (these women should be
    assessed for genetic mutation).                         21
HORMONE THERAPY AND CANCER (CONT.)
•    Observational studies have shown no further increase in
     risk with the use of MHT in women with a family history
     of breast cancer.

•    BRCA mutation increases the risk of breast and ovarian
     cancer, and surgery to remove the tubes and ovaries is
     common in these women. Subsequently, MHT may be
     required to alleviate vasomotor symptoms; no increased
     risk of MHT has been identified in several observational
     studies.

MHT after Treatment of Breast Cancer
• Most observational studies found no increase in breast
  cancer recurrence with MHT use (possibly due to selec-
  tion bias).

•    Two RCTs came to opposite conclusions about the effect
     of systemic MHT after treatment of breast cancer. Both
     trials were terminated prematurely because of worrisome
     findings in one of them.

•    If quality of life is significantly affected and the breast
     cancer has a favourable prognosis, women may elect to
     use MHT after careful counselling about the uncertainty in
     the available data. For women with more advanced breast
     cancers, avoiding use of MHT is prudent.
22
HORMONE THERAPY AND CANCER (CONT.)
•   Observational data suggest that low-dose vaginal estro-
    gen therapy has no effect on breast cancer recurrence.

•   Women on aromatase inhibitors should use vaginal estro-
    gen therapy with caution.

MHT and Endometrial Cancer

•   ET in women with a uterus has a stimulatory effect in
    the endometrium and increases the risk of endometrial
    cancer. Addition of a progestogen (EPT) will counteract
    this effect.

•   Treatment with the currently available TSEC does not
    increase the risk of endometrial cancer.

•   Use of MHT in women after treatment of early stage en-
    dometrial cancers (grade 1 and 2 with negative estrogen
    and progesterone receptors) does not increase the risk of
    recurrence or mortality.

HT and Ovarian Cancer

•   The WHI showed no significant effect of MHT on the risk
    of ovarian cancer.

                                                              23
HORMONE THERAPY AND CANCER (CONT.)
•    A few observational studies suggest an increased risk of
     epithelial and endometrioid ovarian cancers with long
     term MHT; the absolute risk is rare (<1/1,000).

•    MHT use after treatment of ovarian cancer has not been
     shown to affect rates of recurrence or survival.

MHT and Colorectal Cancer

•    A protective effect of MHT has been shown on the inci-
     dence of colorectal cancer in some preclinical observation
     and observational studies; this was also observed in the
     WHI EPT arm.

•    However, follow-up of the WHI found no evidence to
     support the use of MHT to reduce the risk of colorectal
     cancer.

MHT and Lung Cancer

•    In non-smokers, MHT may reduce or have no effect on
     lung cancer risk.

•    In the EPT arm of WHI, current and former smokers over
     age 60 were shown to have a small increase in the risk of
     death from non-small cell lung cancer (4/10,000 per year).
24
WHEN TO REFER
A number of symptomatic challenges may arise as women
approach menopause. While many presentations are eas-
ily addressed by the primary care provider, there are times
when a referral to a specialist is indicated:

Perimenopausal vaginal bleeding

Although common and expected, further assessment is re-
quired for:
• Prolonged heavy bleeding – initial investigations such as a
    CBC, vulvovaginal inspection, Pap smear, bimanual exami-
    nation, pelvic ultrasound and endometrial biopsy should
    be done. If the history is suggestive, von Willebrand’s
    disease should be ruled out.

Postmenopausal bleeding
• Bleeding more than one year after the final menstrual
    period requires investigation consisting of vulvovaginal
    inspection, Pap smear, bimanual examination, pelvic
    ultrasound, and endometrial biopsy if endometrial thick-
    ness > 4 mm.

•   If there is no abnormality but bleeding recurs, refer for
    hysteroscopy. Unscheduled bleeding more than 6 months
    after initiating EPT should be investigated.

                                                               25
WHEN TO REFER (CONT.)
Concerns about MHT
• A referral may be helpful when there are concerns or un-
   certainty about comorbidities, risk factors due to personal
   or family history, or if the MHT regimens prescribed are
   poorly tolerated.

•    A referral can also be useful if there is uncertainty about
     prolonged MHT, use of MHT at advanced age, or difficulty
     having patients discontinue MHT.

Premenstrual syndrome/Premenstrual dysphoric disorder
• When lifestyle recommendations for PMS/PMDD (regard-
   ing diet, exercise, use of caffeine or alcohol, and sleep) fail
   and/or herbal or pharmaceutical treatments are ineffec-
   tive, careful evaluation of the cyclic nature of these com-
   plaints should be documented and referral initiated.

Breast changes
• Complaints of breasts becoming fibrous and/or having
   recurrent cystic changes can be further evaluated by
   mammography ± ultrasound.

•    Unexplained breast pain, a rash, or a persistent palpable
     lump should be referred for evaluation because mam-
     mography may (rarely ) not detect a malignancy.

26
WHEN TO REFER (CONT.)
Dyspareunia
• GSM that results in dyspareunia can be diagnosed during
   careful vulvovaginal inspection. It may be treated with
   lubricants/moisturizers, vaginal estrogen, ospemifene
   (not currently available in Canada) and intravaginal DHEA
   (not currently available in Canada).

•   Pain that is unresponsive to this treatment requires fur-
    ther evaluation to rule out vaginismus, deep pain related
    to pelvic pathology or past surgical treatment, infections,
    and skin conditions such as lichen sclerosus, eczema, and
    Behcet’s disease. Referral for evaluation of skin lesions is
    appropriate. Referral to a pelvic floor physiotherapist can
    be helpful for myofascial pain and incontinence.

Insomnia
• Sleep disturbance is common in perimenopausal and
    postmenopausal women. Sleep patterns often improve
    with treatment of vasomotor symptoms and micronized
    progesterone improves the efficiency of sleep.

•   If persistent, disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea,
    fibromyalgia and restless legs syndrome need to be
    excluded or managed by means of a sleep study and/or
    specialist referral.

                                                                27
WHEN TO REFER (CONT.)
Relevant family history
• Referral may be appropriate for women with a family his-
    tory of breast cancer, or of thrombophilias such as Protein
    C and Protein S deficiency or Factor V Leiden mutation.

Osteoporosis
• Fracture risk assessment is critical in postmenopausal
    women. Referral to an osteoporosis clinic for women with
    increased risk is often helpful.



TROUBLESHOOTING
Vaginal bleeding
• Unscheduled bleeding is the most common problem for
   women on MHT. Some bleeding for up to 6 months after
   beginning MHT is acceptable. If bleeding is heavy or fre-
   quent, investigations should be carried out sooner.

•    The incidence of endometrial cancer in women on EPT
     using continuous progestogen is not increased above the
     incidence in the general population. Women on EPT with
     cyclical progestogen have a slight increase in endometrial
     cancer risk.

•    Investigations should include history, physical examina-
28
TROUBLESHOOTING (CONT.)
    tion, vulvar and vaginal inspection, Pap smear, directed
    cultures, and bimanual examination. Ensure that the
    bleeding is vaginal and not urethral or rectal.

•   Pelvic ultrasound to check for endometrial thickness can
    be carried out before performing an endometrial biopsy.
    An endometrial thickness ≤ 4 mm is reassuring.

•   If bleeding recurs, endometrial biopsy, diagnostic hyster-
    oscopy, or sonohysterogram should be performed.

•   Therapeutic options are to switch from continuous pro-
    gestogen use to cyclical progestogen, to reduce the dose
    of estrogen or the route of administration, or to switch to
    use of a TSEC.

Breast Pain
• Breast symptoms are least likely to occur with the lowest
   doses of MHT.

•   Women who used a TSEC for 2 years had no increase in
    breast density or discomfort.

Mood Change
• Women who experience depression or irritability with
  use of progestogens may benefit from changing the type
                                                                 29
TROUBLESHOOTING (CONT.)
    of progestogen or the regimen used (cyclical or continu-
    ous).

•   If this is unsuccessful, discontinuing use of the proges-
    togen may be necessary. If continuing with unopposed
    ET, endometrial monitoring with ultrasound or biopsy is
    required.

•   Use of a TSEC avoids use of a progestogen and any associ-
    ated mood change.

Headaches
• Headache in women on MHT may be tension headache,
   migraine headache with or without aura, or cluster head-
   ache.

•   Tension headache will frequently respond to lifestyle
    modifications, stress management, and use of non-narcot-
    ic analgesics.

•  Migraine headache is usually managed with use of trip-
   tans, beta-blockers, anti-depressants or anticonvulsants.
   However, because the frequency and severity of migraine
   may be affected by fluctuations in hormone levels, hor-
   mone therapy may be helpful. Migraine frequency may
   increase in the perimenopause and decrease after meno-
30 pause.
TROUBLESHOOTING (CONT.)
•   Menstrual migraine may improve with use of transder-
    mal estradiol beginning in the week before menses and
    continuing to the end of menses.

•   Women who have migraine headaches without aura may
    have improvement with MHT. Transdermal estradiol and
    micronized progesterone may be preferred because oral
    estrogen provides less stable serum estradiol levels and
    synthetic progestins may aggravate headache.

•   Women who have migraine headaches with aura may be
    adversely affected by MHT. If auras worsen, MHT doses
    should be reduced and possibly discontinued.

•   Migraine headache with aura is associated with double
    the risk of stroke.

•   When in doubt, a headache expert should be consulted.

Progestogen Intolerance
• Some women may have specific intolerance to a proges-
   togen, with symptoms including bloating, breast tender-
   ness, and mood changes. Micronized progesterone can
   also cause excess drowsiness in some patients.

•   These symptoms may improve with switching from cycli-
                                                               31
TROUBLESHOOTING (CONT.)
    cal to continuous progestogen use, switching to another
    progestogen, administering micronized progesterone vagi-
    nally, insertion of a progestogen-releasing IUS, a reduction
    in the doses of both estrogen and progestogen, or switch-
    ing to use of a TSEC.

•   If these options are not effective and estrogen therapy is
    required, the effects of unopposed estrogen therapy on
    the endometrium must be monitored with transvaginal
    ultrasound and endometrial biopsy.

Vaginal Symptoms
• Systemic low-dose estrogen therapy may not relieve
   symptoms of vaginal mucosal atrophy and may require
   vaginal administration of estrogen (creams, tablets, or
   estradiol-releasing silastic ring).

•   If symptoms persist with vaginal therapy, consider apply-
    ing vaginal cream to the introitus and non-hair bearing
    vulvar tissues.

•   Attempting intercourse in the presence of mucosal atro-
    phy may lead to secondary vaginismus.

•  In women with persistent vulvovaginal burning and itch-
   ing, vulvar dermatoses including lichen sclerosus, chronic
32 dermatitis, psoriasis, and cancer must be ruled out.
TROUBLESHOOTING (CONT.)
•   Women with persistent vulvar pain may have sexual dys-
    function. Sexual counselling may be appropriate.


SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Hypertension
• Hypertension is not a contraindication to use of MHT.

•   Hypertension in menopausal women (including a history
    of pregnancy-induced hypertension) indicates an in-
    crease in the future risk of cardiovascular complications.
    The INTERHEART study found that women with hyper-
    tension had a 97% increase in risk of CV disease over
    normotensive women.

•   Reversible risks for hypertension (obesity, poor dietary
    habits, high sodium intake, sedentary lifestyle, and high
    alcohol consumption) should be carefully assessed and
    reduced where possible during assessment of the newly
    menopausal woman.

•   The WHI combined hormone therapy trials found that
    oral CEE, with or without added MPA, was associated
    with an increased risk of hypertension in older post-
    menopausal women, but a 2014 review found that oral
    MHT had a largely neutral effect on blood pressure in 33
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
     normotensive women and a neutral effect in hypertensive
     women.

•    Chronic (but not acute) administration of transdermal
     estradiol has been shown to reduce ambulatory blood
     pressure in normotensive postmenopausal women. Use
     of transdermal estradiol may therefore be preferable to
     oral estrogen in hypertensive postmenopausal women.

Endometriosis
• A history of endometriosis is not a contraindication to use
   of MHT in symptomatic menopausal women, but the low-
   est effective estrogen dose should be used.

•    There is no convincing evidence that women with a his-
     tory of endometriosis who have undergone hysterectomy
     should be routinely treated with EPT rather than estrogen
     alone.

•    Similarly, in women who have undergone surgery for
     endometriosis, there is no evidence that subsequent
     progestogen-only therapy, or delaying use of estrogen for
     6 months, reduces the risk of recurrence of endometriosis
     or the development of malignancy in residual or recurrent
     endometriotic deposits.

34
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
•   Use of progestogens in postmenopausal women without
    a uterus and with a history of endometriosis remains a
    matter for clinical judgement and informed choice.

Premature ovarian insufficiency
• Women without contraindications should receive HT until
   the average age of menopause (51 years).

•   Women with surgical POI have more severe symptoms.

•   Typical daily doses for MHT in women with POI are 100
    μg transdermal estradiol, 2 mg oral micronized estradiol,
    or 1.25 mg CEE, with 10mg MPA or 300 mg progester-
    one for 12 days per month. Younger women need higher
    doses of hormones.

•   Meta-analyses have shown that women with POI at
    age <40 and even <45 have a greater incidence of early
    death, cardiac disease, Parkinson’s disease, lowered cog-
    nitive function, increased affective disorders, GSM and
    sexual dysfunction in the absence of hormone therapy.
    Rates of osteoporosis may also be increased.

•   Healthy ovaries should not be removed electively in
    women aged < 50 unless they are at high risk for ovarian
    cancer.
                                                                35
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
Previous endometrial ablation
• There is no common recommendation for use of MHT in
    symptomatic postmenopausal women with a history of
    endometrial ablation.

•   Because endometrial ablation procedures are unable to
    reliably remove all of the endometrium, EPT should be
    used in these women.

Thrombophilia
• The incidence of venous thromboembolism (deep vein
   thrombosis and pulmonary embolism) in women on MHT
   is generally estimated at 1-2 cases per 1000 woman-years.
   This incidence is significantly increased in women with
   thrombophilia.

•   Women with high-risk thrombophilia (deficiency of anti-
    thrombin, Protein C, Protein S, Factor V Leiden mutation)
    should generally avoid use of MHT.

•   The risk of VTE is increased with use of oral estrogen, but
    observational studies have not found any increased risk
    with use of transdermal estradiol.

•  Observational studies have suggested that the risk of
   VTE is higher with use of synthetic progestins than with
36 micronized progesterone.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
•   Postmenopausal women with an increased risk of VTE
    who require MHT will have least risk with use of trans-
    dermal estradiol and micronized progesterone.

•   Population screening for thrombophilia prior to MHT use
    is not justified.

Diabetes
• Diabetes is not a contraindication to use of MHT.

•   RCTs and observational studies suggest MHT reduces the
    prevalence of diabetes by 14-19% while taking the
    medication.

•   A few short-term RCTs have shown either no effect or
    improved control for women with diabetes on MHT.

•   The approach to therapy therefore should be individual-
    ized - preferably transdermal estradiol with micronized
    progesterone should be used.

•   If diabetes occurs with concurrent CV disease, non-
    hormonal therapies for menopausal symptoms are
    preferred.


                                                              37
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
Uterine fibroids
• MHT is not contraindicated in women with fibroids.

•    Fibroids may enlarge or remain stable on MHT.

•    The location of fibroids (submucous, intramural, serosal)
     may affect the incidence of breakthrough bleeding on
     MHT.

Long-term MHT
• HT should not usually be initiated more than 10 years
   after menopause or after 60 years of age as there are
   greater risks of coronary heart disease, VTE and stroke.

•    Long-term use should be individualized for persistent
     vasomotor symptoms, prevention of bone loss or fracture,
     and quality of life.

•    It is advisable for women to use the lowest dose possible
     to control symptoms as they age.

•    It is not necessary to stop MHT at age 65.

•    50% of women will experience symptoms when they stop
     MHT. Of these, 50% will subsequently restart MHT. When
     stopping, there is no evidence to suggest greater success
38
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS (CONT.)
    with sudden stoppage or tapering of therapy.

•   Low-dose vaginal estrogen therapy can be used life-long.

•   Bone loss and GSM will continue with aging.

•   The incidence of breast cancer may increase with longer
    use of MHT, especially with continuous combined estro-
    gen-progestogen.

•   The incidence of DVT and PE increases with age.

•   There is currently insufficient evidence on benefits and
    risks for long term users. One large Finnish database
    has found increased risk of CV mortality, coronary heart
    disease and stroke death in the year after discontinuation
    of MHT.

Professional associations currently recommend greater flex-
ibility for longer MHT use if there are no contraindications
and the balance of risk and benefit is evaluated annually.




                                                               39
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDI-
CINE
•    More than 50% of perimenopausal and postmenopausal
     women use some form of complementary and alterna-
     tive medicine, including natural health products, dietary
     changes, massage, acupuncture, and stress therapies for
     management of midlife and menopausal symptoms.

•    Natural health products are regulated by the Natural
     Health Products Directorate (NHPD), a division of the
     Health Products and Food Branch of Health Canada, and,
     following approval, are assigned an NPN number. Choos-
     ing products with an NPN number is therefore advisable.

•    Of “natural” and “alternative” products, phytoestrogens
     (especially phytoestrogen supplements) have been the
     most extensively studied. Phytoestrogens comprise two
     major categories: (1) isoflavones (particularly genistein),
     which have shown benefit in treating mild vasomotor
     symptoms, and (2) flaxseed, which has not.

•    Soy diets rich in isoflavones have been claimed to show
     some benefit in managing mild vasomotor symptoms and
     GSM, as well as providing bone and breast protection, but
     results are not definitive.


40
COMPLEMENTARY AND ALTERNATIVE MEDI-
CINE (CONT.)
•   St John’s Wort has been shown to improve sleep and
    quality of life in menopausal women.

•   Acupuncture and mind-body techniques (yoga, relax-
    ation, tai chi, meditation) have not been shown to be
    effective in reducing vasomotor symptoms and other
    menopausal symptoms.

•   Cognitive behavioural therapy and, to a lesser extent,
    clinical hypnosis have been shown to be effective in
    reducing vasomotor symptoms.




                                                             41
ABBREVIATIONS
ASA    acetylsalicylic acid
CEE    conjugated equine estrogens
CV     cardiovascular
DHEA   dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate
DVT    deep vein thrombosis
ET     estrogen (alone) therapy
EPT    estrogen-progestogen therapy
FDA    Food and Drug Administration
GSM    genitourinary syndrome of menopause
IUS    intrauterine system
MHT    menopausal hormone therapy
MPA    medroxyprogesterone acetate
PE     pulmonary embolism
PMS    premenstrual syndrome
PMDD   premenstrual dysphoric disorder
POI    premature ovarian insufficiency
RCT    randomized controlled trial
SERM   selective estrogen receptor modulator
SNRI   selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
SSRI   selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
TSEC   tissue selective estrogen complex
VMS    vasomotor symptoms
VTE    venous thromboembolism
WHI    Women’s Health Initiative


42
HORMONE THERAPY PRODUCTS IN CANADA
Table 1: Estrogen Products in Canada
Type of Estrogen    Trade Names        Strengths Available                Comments
Oral Estrogen
conjugated estro-   Premarin®          0.3, 0.625, 1.25 mg tablets        One tablet daily
gen (CE)
17β estradiol       Estrace®           0.5, 1, 2 mg tablets               One tablet daily
Transdermal Estrogen Patches
17β estradiol       Estradot®          25, 37.5, 50, 75, 100 µg patches   Twice weekly application
patch               Sandoz Estradiol   50, 75, 100 µg patches             Twice weekly application
                    Derm® (generic)
                    Oesclim®           25, 50 µg patches                  Twice weekly application
                    Climara®           25, 50, 75, 100 µg patches         Once weekly application
Transdermal Estrogen Gel
17β estradiol gel   Estrogel®          0.75 mg estradiol per 1.25 g       Daily application, use in same
                                       metered dose(=one actuation)       area (do not rotate sites)
                    Divigel®           0.25, 0.5, 1 mg individual packets Daily application
                                                                                                       43
HORMONE THERAPY PRODUCTS IN CANADA (CONT.)
Table 2: Vaginal Estrogen Products in Canada
 Type of Estrogen       Trade Names         Strengths Available       Comments
 conjugated estrogen    Premarin® Vaginal   0.625 mg/gram vaginal     0.5 gm (0.3 mg) vaginally daily for
 (CE)                   Cream               cream                     14 days, then 0.5 gm (0.3 mg) 2 – 3
                                            Refillable applicator     times weekly

 17β estradiol          Vagifem® vaginal    10 µg vaginal tablet with one tablet vaginally daily for 14
                        inserts             applicator                days, then one tablet twice weekly

 17β estradiol          Estring® vaginal    2 mg/vaginal ring         Inserted every 3 months
                        ring
 estrone                Estragyn® 0.1%      1 mg/gm vaginal cream     0.5 – 4 gm (0.5 – 4 mg) daily cyclic
                        vaginal cream       Refillable applicator     (3 weeks on, one week off) or 2 – 3
                                                                      times weekly*

*note: the product monograph for Estragyn® recommends cyclic (three weeks on, one week off) and
 concomitant progestogen therapy



44
HORMONE THERAPY PRODUCTS IN CANADA (CONT.)
Table 3: Progestogen Products in Canada
Type of Progestogen           Trade Names              Strengths Available      Comments
Oral progestogen
progesterone, micronized      Prometrium®, generics    100 mg capsule           Take at bedtime because
                                                                                of sedating effect. Note:
                                                                                generics may contain
                                                                                peanut oil
medroxyprogesterone           Provera®, generics       2.5, 5, 10 mg tablets
acetate
norethindrone acetate         Norlutate®               5 mg tablets
Levonorgestrel intrauterine system (IUS)
levonorgestrel IUS            Mirena®*                 52 mg/IUS, for 5 years   Off-label use

*Mirena is the only LNG-IUS marketed in Canada that has evidence for endometrial protection




                                                                                                            45
HORMONE THERAPY PRODUCTS IN CANADA (CONT.)
Table 4: Combination Hormone Therapy Products in Canada

Type                     Trade Names      Strengths Available                             Comments
Oral Combination Estrogen and Progestogen Products
17B estradiol/ noreth-   Activelle®       1 mg estradiol/0.5 mg norethindrone tablet      One tablet daily
indrone acetate
                         Activelle® LD    LD - 0.5 mg/0.1 mg tablet

17B estradiol/ drospi-   Angeliq®         1 mg estradiol/1 mg drospirenone tablet         One tablet daily
renone
Transdermal Combination Estrogen and Progestogen Products
17B estradiol/ noreth-   Estalis® patch   140/50 (50 µg estradiol/140 µg norethindrone)   Twice weekly
indrone acetate          140/50           250/50 (50 µg estradiol/250 µg norethindrone)   application

Tissue Selective Estrogen Complex (TSEC) – Estrogen and selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)

conjugated estrogen      Duavive®         0.45 mg CE/20 mg bazedoxifene tablet            One tablet daily
(CE)/ bazedoxifene

46
Table 5: Suggested Doses in Hormone Therapy Regimens
Type of Product             Starting Doses
Estrogen*
Oral estrogen:
conjugated estrogen (CE)    0.3 - 0.625 mg tablet daily
17ß-estradiol oral          0.5 – 1 mg tablet daily
Transdermal estrogen:
17ß-estradiol (patch)       25 – 50 µg patches once or twice weekly (see transdermal estrogen products)
17ß-estradiol (gel)         1 - 2 metered doses/actuation daily (Estrogel®)
                            0.5 – 1 mg packets daily (Divigel®)
Progestogen
Oral progestogens:
progesterone micronized     100 mg daily for continuous regimen**
                            200 mg daily for 12 – 14 days/month for cyclic regimen*
medroxyprogesterone         2.5 mg daily continuous regimen*
acetate                     5 mg cyclic regimen (12 -14 days/month)*
 Combined Patches:          50/140 µg continuous regimen twice weekly patch
 17ß-estradiol/norethin-    50/140 µg or 50/250 µg cyclic regimen (i.e., 12 - 14 days/month) twice weekly
 drone acetate              patch
*higher doses of progestogens will be required when higher estrogen doses are used      **off-label use
                                                                                                            47
 NON-HORMONAL MEDICATIONS FOR MENOPAUSE IN CANADA
 Table 6: Non-hormonal Medications for Menopausal Vasomotor Symptoms (VMS)
     Drug                Trade Names/Strengths        Doses                Comments
                         Available
     Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors (SNRI)
     venlafaxine*        Effexor XR®, generics        37.5 mg – 150 mg     Start 37.5 mg daily x 1 week,
                         37.5, 75, 150 mg caps                             then increase to 75 mg daily.
                                                                           Taper to discontinue.
     desvenlafaxine*     Pristiq®, generic            100 - 150 mg daily   Start with 50 mg, then increase
                         50, 100 mg tabs                                   to 100 mg over a few days. Taper
                                                                           to discontinue.
     Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI)
     paroxetine*         Paxil CR®, generics          12.5 – 25 mg daily   Taper to discontinue
                         12.5, 25 mg tabs
     fluoxetine*         Prozac®, generics            20 mg daily
                         10, 20 mg caps
     citalopram*         Celexa®, generics            20 mg daily          Taper to discontinue.
                         20, 40 mg tabs
     escitalopram*       Cipralex®, generics          10 – 20 mg daily     Taper to discontinue
48                       10, 20 mg tabs
NON-HORMONAL MEDICATIONS FOR MENOPAUSE IN CANADA (CONT.)
Table 7: Non-hormonal Medications for Menopausal Vasomotor Symptoms (VMS) (CONT.)
 Drug                Trade Names/Strengths           Doses                 Comments
                     Available
 Alpha-adrenergic agonists
 clonidine           generic**                       0.05 mg bid           Some women may require
                     0.025 mg tabs                                         higher doses (ie 0.05 mg tid), but
                                                                           side effects may limit use. Taper
                                                                           slowly to discontinue
 Gabapentinoids
 gabapentin*         Neurontin®, generics            Start 300 mg daily,  May take 1 – 2 weeks to see ef-
                     100, 300, 400 mg caps           then increase to 300 fective dose for VMS
                     600, 800 mg tabs                mg tid at 3 – 4 day
                                                     intervals***
 pregabalin*          Lyrica®, generics               150 – 300 mg daily   Less well studied in menopause
                      25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 225,
                      300 mg caps
*off-lable use (not approved by Health Canada for this indication)
**Dixarit® tablets have been discontinued
***doses of 2,400 mg of gabapentin have been used in one study but were associated with more side effects
                                                                                                                49
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Canadian Menopause Society/Société Canadienne de Méno-
pause (CMS/SCM) wishes to thank the following health care
experts for the development of this pocket guide:

        Denise Black, MD, FRCSC
        Celine Bouchard, MD, FRCSC
        Christine Derzko, MD, FRCSC
        Michel Fortier, MD, FRCSC
        Susan Goldstein, MD, CCFP, FCFP, NCMP
        Vicki Holmes, MD, NCMP
        Elaine Jolly, MD, FRCSC
        Robert Reid, MD, FRCSC
        Timothy Rowe, MB BS, FRCSC, FRCOG
        Wendy Wolfman, MD, FRCSC, FACOG, NCMP
        Chui Kin Yuen, MD, FRCSC, FACOG, MBA
        Nese Yuksel, BSc. Pharm, Pharm.D, FCSHP, NCMP


CMS/SCM also wishes to thank our readers who have been
very supportive and help distribute to others.


Layout and Design: Lini Qiao
Publisher: CMS/SCM


                                                            50
