Guide to
menstrual hygiene
materials
May 2019

First edition

Supply Division / Water, Sanitation & Education Centre
Programme Division / Water, Sanitation & Hygiene
3 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017 USA
www.unicef.org

Commentaries represent the personal views of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the positions of the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The designations employed
in this publication and the presentation of the material do not imply on the part of UNICEF
the expression of any opinion whatsoever concerning the legal status of any country or
territory, or of its authorities or the delimitations of its frontiers.

Edited by Phil Poirier and designed by Noha Habaieb
Cover illustration credits : © Noha Habaieb



For more information on this document, please contact:
Anne Cabrera-Clerget, Contracts Manager acabreraclerget@unicef.org
Brooke Yamakoshi, WASH Specialist, byamakoshi@unicef.org
         Guide to
menstrual hygiene materials
                Contents

Acknowledgements                                       6
Key terms                                              7
Overview                                               8
Introduction                                           9
Procuring menstrual hygiene materials and supplies    12
Consulting with girls and women                       16
Understanding menstrual hygiene materials            20
     Menstrual cloth                                 22
     Reusable pad                                    24
     Disposable sanitary pad                         26
     Tampon                                          28
     Menstrual Cup                                   30
Summary of materials                                 32
Monitoring and learning                              34
Annex I: Additional resources                        36
                             Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                                                               5
© UNICEF/UNI132359/Nesbitt
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                        Acknowledgements
            This guidance was prepared by Sophia Roeckel, menstrual hygiene management intern,
            Anne Cabrera-Clerget, Contracts Manager, and Brooke Yamakoshi, WASH Specialist, at
            UNICEF. Special thanks to all of the contributors to the guidance and background literature
            review, who shared information and documentation: Marni Sommer (Columbia University);
            Nancy Muller (PATH); Paul LaBarre (UNICEF); Gerda Larsson and Sarah Anwar (The Case
            for Her); Lhamo Yangchen Sherpa and Leah Meadows (PSI); Leisa Hirtz (Women's Global
            Health Innovations); Penny Phillips-Howard (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine); Mariane
            Tellier and Laura Hytti (WoMena); and Michael Moscherosch (Johnson & Johnson). Sincere
            gratitude to UNICEF internal reviewers: Peter Harvey, Djani Zadi, and Jessica Tribbe from
            Supply Division; Patty Alleman, Lizette Burgers, Leisa Gibson, Ayuko Matsuhashi, and
            Megan Tucker from Programme Division; Massimiliano Sani and Florence Wanjira Munyiri
            from the Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office; and Claire Buty and Paola Babos
            from the West and Central Africa Regional Office. Thanks to Monica Serrano, knowledge
            management consultant with Programme Division (WASH) in NY, for her assistance in
            finalising the guidance.




6
                                                                                          Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




Key terms
Menstruation or menses is the natural bodily process of releasing blood and associated
matter from the uterus through the vagina as part of the menstrual cycle.

Menarche is the onset of menstruation, the time when a girl has her first menstrual
period.

Menstrual hygiene management (MHM) refers to management of hygiene associated
with the menstrual process. WHO and UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for
drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene has used the following definition of MHM: ‘Women
and adolescent girls are using a clean menstrual management material to absorb or collect
menstrual blood, that can be changed in privacy as often as necessary for the duration of
a menstrual period, using soap and water for washing the body as required, and having
access to safe and convenient facilities to dispose of used menstrual management
materials. They understand the basic facts linked to the menstrual cycle and how to
manage it with dignity and without discomfort or fear1.

Menstrual health and hygiene (MHH) encompasses both MHM and the broader
systemic factors that link menstruation with health, well-being, gender equality, education,
equity, empowerment, and rights. These systematic factors have been summarised by
UNESCO as accurate and timely knowledge, available, safe, and affordable materials,
informed and comfortable professionals, referral and access to health services, sanitation
and washing facilities, positive social norms, safe and hygienic disposal and advocacy and
policy.

A menstruator is a person who menstruates and therefore has menstrual health and
hygiene needs – including girls, women, transgender and non-binary persons. Throughout
this guidance, the term ‘girls and women’ is used as a shorthand term to increase
readability and refers to all menstruators regardless of gender identity.

Menstrual hygiene materials are the products used to catch menstrual flow, such as
pads, cloths, tampons or cups.

Menstrual supplies are other supportive items needed for MHH, such as body and
laundry soap, underwear and pain relief items.

Menstrual facilities are those facilities most associated with a safe and dignified
menstruation, such as toilets and water infrastructure.




1WHO/UNICEF     (2012) Consultation on draft long list of goal, target and indicator options for future global
monitoring of water, sanitation and hygiene. Available at https://washdata.org/sites/default/files/documents/
reports/2017-06/JMP-2012-post2015-consultation.pdf


                                                                                                                            7
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                                         overview
            This document provides guidance for staff from UNICEF Supply Division and Programme
            Division (WASH, Education, and Protection sections) on the selection and procurement of
            appropriate materials and supplies for menstrual hygiene management, particularly during
            humanitarian response.

            The guide is meant to familiarise UNICEF staff members with the key characteristics
            and requirements for the most common menstrual hygiene materials: menstrual cloths,
            reusable pads, disposable pads, menstrual cups and tampons. For each menstrual
            material, the environmental, health, and financial aspects are highlighted in individual
            tables – along with considerations of availability, user experience, and standards and
            regulations. Technical specifications are provided for each material. The guide concludes
            with a summary table of these key attributes.

            This guide is intentionally narrow in scope and does not cover other elements of
            menstrual health and hygiene programmes, which are instead outlined and explored in the
            companion piece Guidance on Menstrual Health and Hygiene. There are other additional
            rich resources for menstrual hygiene programming in emergencies which complement this
            guidance, including WaterAid’s comprehensive Menstrual Hygiene Matters and Columbia
            University and IRC’s MHM in Emergencies Toolkit.




8
                                                                            Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




introduction
Access to safe and dignified menstruation is a fundamental need for women and girls.
UNICEF envisions a world where every girl can learn, play, and safeguard her own health
without experiencing stress, shame, or unnecessary barriers to information or supplies
during menstruation. Meeting the hygiene needs of all adolescent girls and women in all
settings is enables human rights, dignity, and public health.

A growing evidence base from low- and middle-income countries shows that many girls
are not able to manage their menses and associated hygiene with ease and dignity.
This deprivation is even more acute for girls and women in emergencies. These girls and
women cannot practice good menstrual health and hygiene at home, at school, at work
or in other public settings, due to a combination discriminatory social environments,
inaccurate information, poor facilities, and limited choice of absorbent materials. Public
infrastructure and policies in health, WASH, and education under-prioritise and under-
resource menstrual hygiene, support, and knowledge. In addition, myths and taboos often
promote a high level of secrecy about even the most basic menstruation facts – leading
to shame and exclusion for women and girls. Inaccessible WASH facilities, access to
information and materials are barriers for women and girls with disabilities manging their
menstruation hygienically and with dignity.

Globally, there is growing attention to menstrual health and hygiene in the development
and humanitarian communities. UNICEF is helping to lead this expansion, with an
increasing number of country offices reporting menstrual health and hygiene (MHH)
activities in both their development and humanitarian programmes. And MHH has
been approved by UNICEF’s Executive Board as one of UNICEF’s five core priorities for
adolescent girls in its Gender Action Plan (2018-2021), with specific targets in the Strategic
Plan covering the same time period. Improving MHH has become a central part of
UNICEF’s commitment to ensure that girls grow up healthy and reach their full potential.
For both adolescent girls and women, UNICEF commits to programming that strives to
increase confidence, knowledge, and skills – and improve access to materials and facilities
– for them to manage their menstruation safely and with dignity.

UNICEF works to improve girls’ and women’s menstrual health and hygiene in four areas:
social support, knowledge and skills, facilities and services, and access to absorbent
materials and supportive supplies.




                                                                                                              9
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




10
 © UNICEF/UN0145554/Schermbrucker
                                                                           Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

•   Social support: Many girls and women face discriminatory attitudes and beliefs
    around menstruation that lead them to experience their menses with shame and
    embarrassment. Girls’ experiences in schools reveal common challenges, often due
    to unsupportive social environments: stress, teasing, and a range of restrictions on
    everything from school attendance to food choices are common. Girls should be
    able to participate in daily activities during their period without being subjected to
    stigma or exclusion from peers, parents, teachers, or community leaders. Community
    involvement, which specifically includes boys and men, and traditional and religious
    leaders, is key to changing perceptions, practices and, ultimately, national policies.

•   Knowledge and skills: Many girls reach menarche without critical information about
    menstruation, resulting in fear and stress. This information may come too late, after
    a girl has had her first period, or not at all, due taboos around puberty education
    linked to sexual and reproductive health. Before they reach menarche, girls need an
    understanding of the biology of the menstrual cycle and the opportunities to learn
    the skills to safely and privately manage menstruation – and the pain that they may
    experience during it. Boys similarly need an understanding of the changes to their
    bodies and those of their female peers, delivered in a way that cultivates solidarity and
    builds social support. Teachers, parents, and traditional leaders have a similar need
    for accurate information, so that they are in a better position to support girls as they
    approach menarche and during menstruation.

•   Facilities and services: Girls and women frequently lack the water, toilets, and
    disposal mechanisms to manage their menstruation at school, at home, at work, and
    in other public institutions such as healthcare facilities or government buildings. In
    some cases, it can be barrier to school attendance, causing girls to miss out on their
    education. MHH facilities and services should be established in a sustainable, safe and
    appropriate manner. Environmentally friendly, culturally-appropriate, safe and efficient
    hygiene and waste management approaches should be based on the best solution
    depending on the context. WASH facilities and reliable services must allow women
    and girls to safely, comfortably, and privately manage menstruation – and must be
    accessible to girls and women with disabilities.

•   Materials: Access to high quality, appropriate hygienic absorbent materials to manage
    menstruation is lacking for most girls and women in UNICEF programme countries.
    UNICEF works to ensure that girls and women have access to a range of affordable
    and appropriate options rather than promoting any one option. This may involve
    working with government and the private sector to set standards for products, sharing
    research findings with the private sector to stimulate innovation to meet demand, or
    other approaches. There is no one menstrual material or product that suits every girl
    and woman in all settings. Girls and women have different needs and preferences
    for MHH materials, and these may change further depending on whether they are at
    school, at home, at work, or in other public settings. Girls and women with different
    types of disabilities may also have specific preferences depending on their situation.
    There is need to increase efforts to increase availability and choice of menstrual
    hygiene materials, considering affordability, sustainability, disposal, and local market
    considerations. For example, solutions looking at wider market actions, such as the
    development of manufacturing standards or removing tariffs on sanitary products,
    should be considered.

These are UNICEF’s four ‘pillars’ for MHH programming, and they are described in more
detail in the Guidance on Menstrual Health and Hygiene. This document is a companion
piece to that guidance, and it gives more detailed advice on specific considerations for the
identification, assessment and procurement of MHH materials, particularly in humanitarian
response. The 2012 WaterAid publication Menstrual Hygiene Matters and the MHM
in Emergencies Toolkit, published by Columbia University and the IRC in 2017, offer
additional and complementary technical resources on MHM.


                                                                                                              11
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                   Procuring menstrual
                     hygiene materials
                        and supplies




12
                                                                            Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




When should UNICEF directly procure menstrual hygiene materials and supplies?

There is no overall rule that dictates when UNICEF should or should not procure
menstrual hygiene materials and supplies. UNICEF offices make procurement
decisions based on their specific context and needs.

A rapid review of country office annual reports and records show that UNICEF offices
most frequently directly procure menstrual hygiene materials and supporting supplies
during humanitarian response. Procurement is often required to support displaced
women and girls who have lost access to their usual possessions, and the income and
markets through which they could replace them. UNICEF supply assistance may be
best suited to the beginning of a rapid onset emergency, but will vary by context, and
may be replaced by gender-sensitive cash or voucher systems as time progresses.

Generally, direct procurement of materials for recurrent provision to girls and women
in development programmes is heavily dependent on external funding and therefore
may not be advisable unless systems are in place for recurrent costs. Experiences
from UNICEF offices further show that supply assistance through development
programmes may offer only limited choice of materials and supplies to girls and
women, so this needs careful needs assessment and evaluation. However, as
governments around the world from the UK to South Africa pass legislation requiring
public funding for menstrual hygiene materials in schools, UNICEF can play a role in
advising governments and generating evidence on these programmes.




Menstrual hygiene materials are those used to catch menstrual flow, such as cloths,
reusable and disposable pads, menstrual cups and tampons. Menstrual supplies are other
supportive items for menstrual hygiene and health more broadly, such as soap, underwear
and pain relief.

A wide range of menstrual hygiene materials, under many different product names, are
available around the world. Many products are promoted by their manufacturers based
on claims of appropriateness, culturally acceptability, cost effectiveness or reduced
environmental impact. However, few of these claims are backed with credible data on
usability and cultural acceptance of users.

To fill this gap and provide an evidence base for this guidance, UNICEF carried out a
review of the literature on menstrual hygiene materials and their use in development and
emergency contexts. This review can be found on the UNICEF intranet, and can be obtained
through country offices, and is the source for the tables found in this document.

As with all aspects of menstrual health and hygiene programmes, consultations with girls,
women, and other menstruators is essential, to understand the range of materials that are
available, which ones are currently used, and which are preferred in a specific context, along
with what common practices exist around their use. The next section provides information
on such consultations.

Menstrual hygiene materials can be sourced locally or regionally by country offices. All
standard UNICEF procurement processes and procedures apply to the procurement of
menstrual hygiene materials and supplies. The country office should always assess local or
regional markets to identify the best sourcing options, rather than assuming a broad national
assessment of sourcing solutions will be either appropriate or effective.

                                                                                                              13
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials



                   Vendors supplying menstrual hygiene materials range from large multinational companies
                   to small manufacturers, social enterprises and non-profit organisations. In high-income
                   countries, disposable sanitary pads account for the majority of the market, and three
                   multinational companies dominate their manufacture and sale. In low- and middle-income
                   countries (LMICs), market reach and the size of manufacturers and distributors varies
                   dramatically and assessments are frequently lacking2. As a result, in LMICs, the majority
                   of girls and women use cloth to manage their menstruation. As you will read in this guide,
                   cloth is an acceptable alternative for menstrual hygiene where it is preferred and can be
                   hygienically managed by girls and women.

                   An increasing number of small- and medium-sized social enterprises that manufacture,
                   distribute, and/or sell menstrual hygiene materials have entered the market in recent years in
                   LMICs, though they have faced challenges to scale3. Social enterprises sometimes provide
                   menstrual hygiene materials along with programme support, such as education, and may
                   be non-profit, for profit, or a combination of both. Other non-profits (sometimes known as
                   non-governmental organisations, or NGOs) may also produce or distribute menstrual hygiene
                   materials.

                   In typical procurement situations, social enterprises may often find it difficult to compete
                   with for-profit organisations in a traditional bidding process based on unit costs, as they often
                   have costs reflecting local production based on fair salaries, training and education costs.
                   Keep in mind that NGOs working in the provision of menstrual hygiene materials could be
                   a good fit as a partner organisation, as their principles and approach are often in alignment
                   with UNICEF’s and they may mobilize additional resources towards partnership. Country
                   offices should decide whether procurement or a partnership is more appropriate with this in
                   mind, in line with UNICEF’s Supply Manual and the its Procedure on Working with Civil
                   Society Organisations.

                   In humanitarian response, UNICEF often procures menstrual hygiene materials and
                   supplies, also included in WASH & Dignity kits, particularly in the initial stages of a rapid
                   onset emergency when girls and women lack their normal possessions and coping
                   mechanisms. It is especially important to provide materials that girls and women are
                   familiar with and can use in their new context. For example, if cloth is widely used before an
                   emergency, this may be desired by girls and women as part of supply assistance. However,
                   if girls and women are displaced and without access to water, laundry soap, or private places
                   to wash and dry menstrual cloth, they may prefer another option that they can manage more
                   easily, such as disposable pads. For effective response, preparedness is essential – when
                   existing information on the preferences and practices of girls and women are available,
                   ensure it is integrated into supply planning.

                   In emergencies, supply assistance helps UNICEF fulfil the Core Commitments to Children
                   in Humanitarian Action. Such supply assistance must be informed by consultation
                   with affected people and in line with SPHERE or locally-defined standards, and based on
                   assessment results or reasonable assumption that affected girls and women lack menstrual
                   hygiene materials. Despite the need for individual choice, procurement decisions will
                   frequently be based on the majority preference. Cash and voucher systems are alternatives
                   that can provide greater individual choice based on needs; however, care must be taken to
                   ensure girls and women retain agency over the use of cash.

                   When preparing emergency preparedness plans, incorporate information from the
                   development programme on girls’ and women’s current practices and preferences for


                   2FSG (2016) An Opportunity to Address Menstrual Health and Gender Equity. Washington, D.C. FSG.
                   Available at https://www.fsg.org/publications/opportunity-address-menstrual-health-and-gender-equity.
                   3Ibid.



14
                                                                                      Guide to menstrual hygiene materials



menstrual hygiene management and materials. If you are in a country that experiences
frequent emergencies, review previous experiences with MHM in emergencies from
UNICEF or WASH or Protection Cluster partners. Next, include menstrual hygiene materials
and supplies in your plans for supply prepositioning or LTAs. Preparedness is also the stage
to include MHM education together with hygiene promotion and community engagement
activities in your contingency PCAs with programme partners and prepare or provide training
for implementing partners. Depending on the context, communication materials from a
development programme may also be appropriate during emergency response.

In humanitarian response, first consult with women and girls on their situation, needs, and
preferences (refer to the next section on consulting with women and girls). Based on their
needs and preferences, review the materials guide along with the products available on the
local market and validate or adjust your procurement and programme strategies accordingly.

The recovery phase following an emergency can provide an opportunity for MHH education
and training, as well as the introduction of new materials that may be more suitable or
preferred by girls and women, as part of a development transition.

In development programmes, UNICEF generally does not procure menstrual hygiene
materials and supplies as such direct supply assistance is unsustainable over the longer
term. UNICEF can instead play a key role in strengthening the state, market, and community
systems that can sustainably supply menstrual hygiene materials without reliance on
external funding. UNICEF can support a ministry of education to budget for the provision of
menstrual hygiene materials for girls, or work with local school management committees
on a local recurrent fundraising mechanism. For example, at the community level, Village
Savings and Loan Associations have been shown to support women effectively to save and
invest in strategic goods including MHM products4.

Expanding access to a range of materials, rather than offering or promoting only one option,
ensures freedom of choice and dignity, enabling girls and women to decide based on their
own preferences and individual needs. To support the introduction of new materials on the
market, some UNICEF offices have worked with government to develop national product
standards – which should of course be informed by an analysis of the situation with supply
and programme colleagues.




4FSG (2016) Available at https://www.fsg.org/publications/opportunity-address-menstrual-health-and-gender-
equity.

                                                                                                                        15
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                  Consulting with girls
                      and women




16
                                                                          Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

Girls and women manage their menstruation using many different materials and
strategies, each developed for the specific context of her life. Consultations and
participatory programming is central to UNICEF’s efforts to support girls and women to
manage their menstruation safely and with dignity, in both development and humanitarian
settings. Consultations are an effective way of getting in-depth information about the
beliefs, attitudes, perceptions, and practices related to menstrual health and hygiene in a
given context. They can be complemented by other qualitative and quantitative methods of
data collection.




Methods for collecting data on menstrual hygiene materials
Qualitative methods are used to explore beliefs or perceptions, specific aspects of
a programme and to capture beneficiaries’ direct, voiced experiences. These methods
provide in-depth information and are useful when discussing sensitive topics.

Examples of qualitative methods are:

•   Focus group discussions of age-segmented groups of girls or women (8-10
    participants), led by a female facilitator.
•   Structured interviews with key individuals – for example female WASH
    committee members, girls and women from the target population, or programme
    staff.
•   Semi-structured interviews or discussions with local staff, which are most
    useful when staff are from the same population as the female beneficiaries or
    have worked with the population for a long time.

Quantitative methods are used to measure the extent of coverage, changes in
impact, and to obtain statistical data on knowledge and perceptions, such as on the
usefulness or satisfaction with an intervention.

•   Checklists/walk-throughs include physical inspections of existing WASH
    facilities (communal, family and schools) and can utilise qualitative methods as
    well, such as during a safety audit.
•   Surveys (i.e., post distribution monitoring, or a Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice
    survey) can assess supply availability and identify gaps in knowledge and access.
•   Market assessments can explore the availability of products locally, to inform
    procurement decisions or the decision to move to a cash or voucher system.

Adapted from Columbia University and IRC (2017) MHM in Emergencies Toolkit




UNICEF and its partners have tested a range of tools and approaches to consultations.
These experience are mostly documented from development settings, and can be adapted
and used when deciding how to gather evidence on materials for menstrual hygiene.
In 2012, UNICEF and the Center for Global Safe Water at Emory University initiated a
programme to support collaborative research focused specifically on exploring the MHM
barriers faced by female students, and describes how consultations, including those
around materials preferences, were effectively carried out. The data collection tools and
methodology for this collaboration were published in 2013 in the resource document Tools
for Assessing MHM in Schools and have been used widely, in at least 20 countries
around the world.

When choosing which materials to procure, there are specific aspects that need
consideration.

                                                                                                            17
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

                            Table I below includes a (non-exhaustive) list of considerations and discussion starting
                            points for consultations with implementing partners in five categories: culture and context,
                            health, financial and economic, use and care, and disposal.

Table 1. Some considerations for consultation and procurement
(non-exhaustive)
                                                               CATEGORIES
       Culture                           Health                Financial and              Use                     Disposal
     and context                                                  economic              and care

•     What are the              •      Is the material     •    What is the         •   Are girls and        •   How frequently
      local menstrual                  associated with          one-off cost of a       women familiar           must the material
      beliefs and                      health risks?            material?               with the material?       be disposed of?
      practices?                •      What is the         •    What is the life-   •   How frequently       •   What are the
•     What are the                     average age of           cycle cost?             does the material        local beliefs about
      local levels of                  menarche?           •    Are funds for           need to be               different methods
      knowledge about           •      Is female genital        replenishment           changed?                 of disposal?
      MHH?                             mutilation or            available?          •   Does the material    •   Are discreet
•     Which materials                  cutting practiced   •    Can the material        require supportive       disposal points
      are currently used               locally?                 and supportive          supplies and are         available for used
      and available?                                            supplies be             they available?          materials?
•     Which materials                                           procured locally    •   How is the           •   Is there a waste
      are preferred?                                            through the             material cleaned         collection system
•     Which materials                                           market?                 and are supplies         and endpoint
      are preferred                                        •    Are girls and           available?               disposal site?
      by girls and                                              women able to       •   Are water, private   •   Are girls and
      women with                                                afford material         spaces for               women aware
      different types of                                        without external        washing, drying          of disposal
      disabilities?                                             assistance?             and changing             mechanisms?
•     Are staff trained                                                                 available?
      and able to                                                                   •   How absorbent/
      discuss MHH?                                                                      comfortable/
•     Is there an                                                                       fast-drying is the
      emergency?                                                                        material?
      What type? Are
      distribution points
      and facilities
      accessible for
      girls and women,
      including those
      with disabilities?
•     Is it wet or dry
      season?




                            Practical tips for effective consultations and data collection on MHH, to keep in mind when
                            thinking about MH materials research include:

                            •       When appropriate, include adolescent girls and women within the research team and
                                    provide them with training and support to lead discussions with other adolescent girls
                                    and women.

                            •       Engage girls with disabilities in the community and their caregivers – if needed
                                    working through organisations of people with disabilities to help to plan and carry out
                                    appropriate consultations.



18
                                                                                 Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

•     Include men and boys, particularly those who are involved in programme delivery or
      humanitarian response – for example, men who manage NFI distribution in emergencies.

•     Ensure an ethical and confidential consultation process.

•     Disseminate the findings widely to reduce duplication of effort and help others quickly
      access information.

Additional guidance on MHH consultations in humanitarian settings can be found in the
MHM in Emergencies Toolkit5.




                                      Photos




    © UNICEF/UN0236446/Nakibuuka




5Available at https://www.rescue.org/resource/menstrual-hygiene-management-mhm-emergencies-toolkit.


                                                                                                                   19
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                          Understanding
                            menstrual
                         hygiene materials




20
                                                                                      Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

To procure appropriate menstrual hygiene materials for women and girls in both
development and emergency contexts, it is important to understand the potential
advantages and disadvantages of these products in different contexts. This section
presents an overview of each menstrual material, and it is followed by a summary
comparison table of all materials, illustrating similarities and differences.

For each material, this guide considers their effects on health, the environment, waste
management systems, and affordability – as well as user experience and cultural
considerations. The summary pages also highlight various existing global standards,
regulations and technical specifications. This is in line with UNICEF’s Procedure for
Sustainable Procurement6 (SUPPLY/PROCEDURE/2018/001), which stipulates that
economic, social, and environmental aspects of supply planning should be considered.
This means striving for the best value for money considering whole lifecycle costs,
reducing environmental impact and promoting local markets and human rights.

The guide below considers menstrual cloths, reusable pads, disposable pads, menstrual
cups and tampons. Suppliers and vendors of these products are also included in a
database hosted by UNICEF’s Supply Division7. While other MHH materials, such as
integrated or absorbent underwear, menstrual sponges and reusable tampons are
available, they not included in this guidance because of the lack of available research on
these materials8.



Which material should UNICEF promote?
No single material will be preferred by all girls or all women, all the time, and all
materials have aspects that girls and women may like and dislike for different reasons.
According to a landscape analysis carried out by FSG in 2016, it is estimated that over
75% of women and girls in high- and upper middle-income countries use commercially
produced products, while over half of women and girls in LMICs use homemade
products9.

Both commercial and homemade products have advantages and disadvantages,
and it is not the role of UNICEF to promote one over the other, so long as the health
and dignity needs of girls are being met. Where widespread unhygienic or harmful
practices are followed for MHM, then UNICEF should actively promote alternatives
that do not put girls and women at risk of infection.

In development programmes, existing information on practices and preferences may
already be available, and UNICEF programmes should be responsive to the situation
while still respecting that there is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution. Though a majority of
girls and women may prefer one material, this should not preclude choice for those
with other preferences.

The provision of menstrual hygiene materials in humanitarian response should
be informed by formative consultations with girls and women, on their current
practices and preferences, and how these may have changed since the emergency.
Consultations can also inform preparation for an emergency, and they are encouraged
as part of country office preparedness strategies.



6Available at https://www.unicef.org/supply/files/UNICEF_Procedure_on_Sustainable_Procurement.pdf.
7For more details on the database of suppliers and vendors, please contact: acabreraclerget@unicef.org.
8For a brief discussion on these alternative products, see the Literature Review on the UNICEF intranet
(access for UNICEF staff)
9FSG (2016) Available at https://www.fsg.org/publications/opportunity-address-menstrual-health-and-
gender-equity.


                                                                                                                        21
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                      Menstrual cloth
     Characteristic     Specific information of relevance for UNICEF procurement
       / attribute

                       Cloths are reusable pieces of fabric worn externally to the body, in underwear or tied to
                       the waist to absorb menstrual flow. They are made from either newly purchased pieces
      Description      of fabric (mostly cotton) or old fabric repurposed from clothing or another use. There is
                       no guidance on how long cloths can be reused, but it is generally agreed that this should
                       be for no longer than 1 year. They are consumables and require regular assessment of
                       supply, availability and affordability.



                       There is very little literature on cloths – and most studies merely refer to cloth as a
       Identified      method for MHH. While few studies exist on the health effects of cloth, some parallels
       literature      can be drawn to reusable pads made from cotton. Distinguishing between material
                       failure and behavioural use is difficult.




       Context         Cloth is cheap and available in most contexts. While cloth for MHM is increasingly
                       replaced by disposable pads, cloth remains widely used in low-income countries and is
        of use
                       often distributed in humanitarian response.




                       Proper washing and drying is crucial for safe use, though often difficult due to lack of privacy
          User         and stigma. Training on good user practice, provision of soap, underwear and storage bags,
     experience and    and the availability of private places for washing and drying is important. Thickness, colour,
        cultural       absorbency and softness of fabric, drying-time and number of pads provided are important
     considerations    to consider. The provision of underwear is crucial as girls and women often do not own
                       underwear. This is of particular importance in emergency settings.




22
                                                                              © UNICEF/UN0214925/Vishwanathan
                                                                       Guide to menstrual hygiene materials


                  Compared to reusable pads, cloth is often not recommended for menstrual hygiene
                  management as their use has been associated with abnormal vaginal discharge, skin
    Health        irritations and urogenital infections. Whether this is an inherent characteristic of cloth,
   impacts        or simply indicative of poor conditions of use, is not clear, however; and in some cases,
                  cloth can be hygienically managed. In general, wearing damp or unclean material can lead
                  to rashes and infections.



     Waste        Cloths are environmentally friendly as they can be reused and are mostly made from
management and    natural fabrics. However, in some contexts they are discarded after one use. In the
 environmental    absence of a functioning waste-management system they are often disposed of in the
    impacts       environment. There is a lack of evidence-based guidance on disposal of used cloth.




                  Cloths are cheap to procure locally. The average cost is about US$ 2 per square metre. It
                  is important to provide girls and women with information on how to properly use, wash,
 Affordability
                  dry and store cloths as well as the means to do so (e.g. soap and possibly underwear),
                  because this contributes to recurrent costs.




 Standards and    There are no standards and regulations for menstrual cloth as it is not specifically made
   regulation     for MHH, but rather is available on markets as cloths made from 100% cotton.




                  Soft, light brown or grey multipurpose cloth made from 100% cotton with a size of ca.
                  1 m x 1.5 m, fabric weight of 170-180 g/m2, awrap of minimum 21 threads per cm, a weft
                  of 18.5 threads per cm. Inclusion of use and care instructions in English and other UN
   Technical      languages.
 specifications
                  Supportive supplies required: soap for handwashing, laundry detergent, bucket for
                  washing, clothes line, bag for storage, and scissors. These consumables require regular
                  assessment of supply, availability and affordability.




                                                                                                                23
© UNICEF/UN0270271/Knowles-Coursin
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                      reusable pad
     Characteristic     Specific information of relevance for UNICEF procurement
       / attribute

                       Reusable pads are worn externally to the body in the underwear, to absorb menstrual
                       flow and held in place usually by snaps. They are made from a variety of natural or
      Description      synthetic materials. After use, they are washed, dried and re-used for approximately one
                       year. They are consumables which require regular assessment of supply, availability and
                       affordability.




                       Evidence on reusable pads is scarce and limited to Uganda, Kenya and India. Few
       Identified      intervention studies exist, limiting generalisation. There are challenges to identify if
       literature      a failure or problem using the material is due to the product or the user not using it
                       properly.




                       Prevalence of use is not well-documented and depends on awareness, affordability
       Context         and availability. There are very few large-scale producers of reusable pads and they are
        of use         not readily available in many contexts due to supply chain limitations. Several initiatives
                       exist where girls and women are taught how to produce reusable pads for individual or
                       commercial use, though with varying quality and scale.




                       Compared to cloths, reusable pads are often perceived better by girls and women,
                       though in some cases girls and women prefer cloth due to familiarity. When compared
                       to disposable pads they are sometimes found inconvenient. Proper washing and drying
          User
                       is crucial for safe use, though often difficult due to stigma and lack of privacy. Training on
     experience and
        cultural       good user practice, provision of soap, underwear and storage bags, availability of private
     considerations    places for washing and drying is important. Thickness, colour, absorbency and softness of
                       fabric, drying-time and number of pads provided are important to consider. The provision
                       of underwear is crucial as girls and women often do not own underwear, which is of
                       particular importance in emergency settings.




24
                                                                                © UNICEF/UN0236422/Nakibuuka
                                                                         Guide to menstrual hygiene materials



                   There is very little evidence of health impacts of reusable pad use. There might be an
    Health         association with urinary tract infections and bacterial vaginosis, and the use of damp
   impacts         materials can lead to skin irritations. A private and comfortable place for changing as well
                   as proper washing and drying is important.




     Waste
                   Reusable pads can be used for approximately one year and thus produce significantly less
management and
                   solid waste than single-use, disposable materials. Their use requires laundry soap and
 environmental
                   clean water for washing as well as access to private spaces for drying.
    impacts




                   Reusable pads are generally cost-effective when annualised, but initial investment is
 Affordability     often high. The average cost is between US $ 1.50 and US $ 3 per pad. Girls and women
                   must be educated on safe use and care and supportive supplies provided.




 Standards and
   regulation      Standards for reusable pads exist in Uganda and Kenya but are lacking in most countries.




                   A set should comprise a minimum of five light coloured, washable and reusable
                   sanitary pads made from soft absorbent cotton, preferably flannel with synthetic
                   moisture-impermeable backing, of which a minimum of three pads should have wings.
                   Additionally, the set should include a minimum of two holders with ribbon bands with
                   edges stitched by over-locking or other adequate fixation to secure the pads in position.
                   Workmanship and quality should be adequate to withstand multiple washes for at least
   Technical       one year. A cotton bag for storage and use, as well as pad care instructions in English and
 specifications    other UN languages should be included.

                   Supportive supplies required: Soap for handwashing, laundry detergent, bucket for
                   washing, clothes line, and underwear. These consumables require regular assessment of
                   supply, availability and affordability.

                   For reference, in 2017 Ugandan Bureau of Standard (UNBS) developed a «Reusable
                   sanitary towels — Specification» Reference number US 1782 : 2017




                                                                                                                  25
© UNICEF/Bolivia
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




Disposable sanitary pad
     Characteristic     Specific information of relevance for UNICEF procurement
       / attribute

                       Disposable pads are worn externally to the body in the underwear to absorb menstrual
                       flow. They are disposed of after a maximum of 8 hours; they are therefore consumables
     Description       which require regular assessment of supply, availability and affordability. Pads come in
                       various sizes, absorbencies and materials and consist of a layered design made of blends
                       of plastics, rayon and cotton. Pads should include wings to prevent leakage and keep the
                       pad more securely in place.




      Identified       Only 5 intervention studies were identified. Evidence is limited to Kenya, Ghana, Somalia
                       and India. Few laboratory studies assess health effects, and there is risk of confounding,
      literature
                       social desirability bias, and recall bias affecting results.




                       Local procurement is often easy and cheap as disposable pads are available in most
                       contexts, but not in very remote areas. Locally produced disposable pads are sometimes
       Context         available, though with varying quality. There is a lack of cheap, high-quality biodegradable
                       disposable pads on the market. A problem in emergencies is the lack of continuous
        of use
                       supply of disposable pads and additional challenges with disposal and solid and liquid
                       waste management. Distributing enough pads and ensuring replenishment is important –
                       and distributing disposable and reusable pads simultaneously could be explored.




                       Disposable pads are often preferred and considered aspirational by girls and women as
                       they are cited to be reliable, hygienic, comfortable, easy to use (especially in contexts
       User
                       with limited privacy) and require no access to water for cleaning. Unfamiliar users
  experience and
     cultural          sometimes reuse them. Disposable pad distribution should include education on proper
  considerations       use and safe disposal, while taking local beliefs and practices (e.g. burial, perceptions of
                       blood) into account. The provision of underwear is crucial as girls and women often do
                       not own underwear, which is of particular importance in emergency settings.




26
                                                                              © UNICEF/UN063165/Altaf Ahmad
                                                                          Guide to menstrual hygiene materials


                  In most studies, no significant adverse health effects are reported, though there is
                  inconclusive evidence on the impact of disposable pad use and bacterial vaginosis, as
                  well as reproductive tract infections especially in relation to prolonged wear time. Skin
    Health        compatibility is very high and disposable pads are well tolerated by users in different
   impacts        parts of the world, though quality control is important. Disposal of used pads in flush
                  toilets can lead to clogged pipes and sewage backflow into buildings, presenting a
                  serious health risk and maintenance problem; provision of proper disposal through waste
                  management services is crucial.


                  As pads are disposed after one use they create large quantities of litter, accumulate in
                  landfills, block sanitation systems when thrown in toilets, and release toxins when burned
                  incorrectly. An appropriate waste-management chain must be in place from on-point to end-
                  point. As cultural beliefs and stigma influence individual disposal, users must change their
     Waste        disposal behaviour to manage disposable pads.
management and
 environmental    Suppliers often claim biodegradability of a product without indicating the exact conditions
    impacts       (e.g. temperature, humidity) and timeframe. Thus, it often remains unclear if a product
                  is 100% biodegradable and how long and under which conditions the biodegradation
                  would take place. In theory, biodegradable pads would a lower impact on environment,
                  but their precise impact is poorly understood and the vast majority of pads used are non-
                  biodegradable.



                  Relatively higher prices and reoccurring costs render disposable pads unaffordable
 Affordability    for many. The average cost lays between US $ 0.10 to US $ 0.30 per pad. While local
                  procurement is often possible and cheap, costs for replenishment, underwear, education
                  on use and disposal and ensuring an enabling infrastructure must be considered.




                  Recently, Kenya and Uganda have developed standards for disposable pads. In other
 Standards and    regions, voluntary guidelines were put in place by the industry. There is a need to better
   regulation     understand conditions of biodegradability and there is a lack of cheap, high quality
                  biodegradable pads on the market.



                  Single use, unscented ultra-thin menstrual pads with wings to absorb medium to high
                  flow, with adhesive backing to attach to underwear. One ‘unit’ is a pack containing a
                  minimum of 20 pads. Two units per woman of menstruating age are usually required per
   Technical      distribution, covering a three-month timeframe. Use and care instructions in English and
 specifications   other UN languages should be provided.

                  Supportive supplies required: Soap for handwashing, underwear, lidded bins inside toilet
                  stalls. These consumables require regular assessment of supply, availability and affordability.




                                                                                                                    27
© UNICEF/UN0122319/Faffin
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                      Tampon
     Characteristic     Specific information of relevance for UNICEF procurement
       / attribute

                       Tampons are absorbent materials made from cotton and/or rayon that are inserted into
                       the vagina to absorb menstrual flow. They expand with moisture and thereby avoid
      Description      leakage. They can be worn for up to 8 hours, after which they are removed using the
                       removal string, and disposed of. They come in a variety of sizes, materials and with or
                       without an applicator to assist insertion. Tampons are consumables which require regular
                       assessment of supply, availability and affordability.



                       No feasibility or acceptability study with tampons in development and emergency
       Identified      settings could be identified. However, similarities exist to menstrual cup (insertion) and
       literature      disposable pads (waste management and environmental impacts) and there is a vast
                       amount of literature from high-income countries on health aspects.



       Context
                       Tampons are often not available and are rarely used in low-income countries.
        of use




                       There is a lack of awareness of tampons and prevalence of use is as low as 1%-4%
                       in low-income countries. When known about, girls and women often express fear
          User         of pain and the tampon getting stuck as reasons for non-use. Tampons have to be
     experience and    inserted into the vagina, which presents a barrier for uptake in many cultures as it is
        cultural       inaccurately associated with tearing the hymen and loss of virginity. However, studies on
     considerations    menstrual cups report high acceptability of insertable devices even when met with initial
                       scepticism. Education on safe use and disposal and discussion of myths is crucial. No
                       underwear is required for use.




28
                                                                                    © UNICEF/UNI159374/Pirozzi
                                                                          Guide to menstrual hygiene materials


                  Tampon use is associated with toxic shock syndrome, a rare but potentially fatal
                  disease. To lower this risk, the use of a tampon with the lowest absorbency required is
    Health        recommended, and the tampon should be changed after a maximum of 8 hours. Residual
   impacts        chemical and fragrance can lead to allergic reactions. Soap for handwashing and access
                  to clean water is important to avoid UTIs and vaginal infections. Tampons can be used
                  with an intrauterine device.



                  As tampons are disposed after one-time wear, they create large amounts of waste. The
                  flushing of tampons in toilets can lead to clogging of pipes, service disruption and increased
     Waste
                  maintenance costs. When burned incorrectly, they can release furans (a highly volatile
management and
                  chemical compound) and toxins. Only tampons made from natural fibres biodegrade, while
 environmental
                  those containing plastics remain in the environment. Education on appropriate disposal and
    impacts
                  the availability of an appropriate waste-management chain from on-point to end-point is
                  important.



                  The (perceived) lack of demand leads to a lack of interest from manufactures to supply
                  tampons, making them rarely available in low-income contexts. If available, they are
 Affordability    unaffordable for many. They require continuous purchasing as well as training on safe use
                  and disposal, and education on myths related to virginity. Bins for disposal, and soap can
                  add to programme costs. The average cost is between US $ 0.20 and US $ 0.30.



                  While regulations of tampons vary between countries, many high-income governments
 Standards and
   regulation     require tampons not to contain dangerous chemicals. No regulations or standards were
                  identified for low-income countries.



                  Single use menstrual tampons to absorb low to high flow made from cotton or other
                  materials with similar absorbency and biocompatibility. There is an attached withdrawal
                  cord for removal and the tampon comes with or without applicator. They usually come in
                  two sizes for absorbency; light and regular flow, and to cater for the needs of both young
                  girls and women who have given birth. One ‘unit’ is a pack containing a minimum of 20
   Technical
                  individually wrapped tampons. Inclusion of use and care instructions in English and other
 specifications
                  UN languages is needed.

                  Supportive supplies required: soap for handwashing, lidded bins inside toilet stalls, and a
                  regular waste management system. Consumables require regular assessment of supply,
                  availability and affordability.




                                                                                                                   29
© UNICEF/UN0306434/Abdul
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                      Menstrual Cup
     Characteristic     Specific information of relevance for UNICEF procurement
       / attribute

                       The menstrual cup is a non-absorbent bell-shaped device that is inserted into the vagina to
                       collect menstrual flow. It creates a seal and is held in place by the walls of the vagina. It is
                       typically made of medical-grade silicone. It collects three times more blood than pads or
     Description       tampons and needs to be emptied every 6-12 hours, after which it is rinsed and re-inserted
                       (if facilities allow). After each menstrual cycle the cup must be boiled for 5-10 minutes. Most
                       manufactures offer at least two sizes, and different shapes are becoming more common.
                       Cups are reusable for 5-10 years.




      Identified       There is increasing interest on the acceptability of cups in low-income contexts but the
      literature       few existing studies are of varying quality. All studies have been in Eastern and Southern
                       Africa and South Asia. There is only one study in an emergency context.



       Context         Menstrual cups are not yet widely promoted in low-income countries but
        of use         there is increasing interest and growing evidence of their acceptability.


                       Even in contexts where insertable menstrual products are not known of or used, many
                       studies report high acceptability for the cup after initial behavioural barriers are overcome.
                       However, insertion can present other cultural barriers to cup use, at it is incorrectly
                       associated with breaking the hymen and loss of virginity. Education and discussion of
      User             myths and perceptions are crucial for cup acceptability, as well as continued support
 experience and        and access to knowledge. Cups are often perceived as better than pads or cloths in relation
                       to ease and discretion of washing, drying and storing, comfort, leakage protection, odour
    cultural
                       development, quality and length of wear. Soap for handwashing and a container for boiling
 considerations        and storing are required. No underwear is needed for its use. It is often recommended that
                       cups are rinsed with clean water after emptying and before re-insertion. However, this step
                       is not necessarily required if no water is available in stalls. If desired, an option could
                       be to bring a small bottle of clean water inside stalls to rinse the cup. At the end of the
                       cycle, the cup should be boiled for 5-10 minutes.




30
                                                                                       © UNICEF/UN0226198/KHOY
                                                                                 Guide to menstrual hygiene materials



                           Based on literature from high- and low-income countries, no significant health risks are
      Health               reported. Since cups do not disrupt vaginal flora and pH, health risks like toxic shock
     impacts               syndrome, infections and skin irritations are minimal in comparison to other materials.
                           Cups can be worn with an intrauterine device. Good hand hygiene is important for safe
                           cup use.



      Waste
                           The cup can be used for 5-10 years and thus produces significantly less waste than other
 management and
                           MHH materials. While cups require water for boiling, they need far less than reusable pads or
  environmental
                           cloths.
     impacts




                           The cup allows its user to safely handle menstruation without reoccurring costs for many
   Affordability
                           years. However, as the high initial investment of US$ 10 to US$ 40 presents a barrier for
                           uptake, there is a need for less expensive, high-quality cups on the market.



                           There is a lack of regulations and standards for menstrual cups, though there is consen-
Standards and regu-        sus of the importance of high-quality materials for manufacturing such as medical grade
       lation              silicone. Furthermore, low-quality cups often do not form an effective seal, which can
                           lead to leakage.




                           A reusable, biocompatible menstrual cup made of medical grade silicone or thermoplastic
                           elastomer, to be worn inside the vagina to collect around 10-30 ml. of menstrual flow.
                           Workmanship and quality to maintain its function and shape for a minimum of 5 years
                           are needed. Cups can be provided in two sizes: a bigger menstrual cup for females who
     Technical             have given birth vaginally and a smaller cup for females who have not. A cotton bag
   specifications          for storage, as well as use and care instructions in English and other UN languages is
                           needed.

                           Supportive supplies required: soap for handwashing, containers for boiling, and for
                           bringing water to toilet stalls for rinsing the cup.




                      31                                                                                                   31
 © UNICEF/UN050929/
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                 Summary of materials
                 The table below compares aspects of menstrual hygiene materials. The table should be
                 interpreted with caution as the classification of low, medium, and high is highly dependent on
                 contextual factors. For example, the health risk of tampons is generally accepted to be low,
                 but insertion without proper hand hygiene can lead to infections, and prolonged wear time
                 increases the risk for toxic shock syndrome.



                 Menstrual cloth      Reusable pad       Disposable pad      Menstrual cup         Tampon




     Insertion           -                  -                   -                 Yes                 Yes




  Reusable        Max. 1 year*           1+ year                -              5-10 years              -




 Wear time        Approximately        Approx. 3-6        Approx. 3-6        Approx. 6-12
                                                                                                Max. 8 hours
                   2-4 hours*            hours              hours               hours

*There is a lack of guidance on safe wear- and life-time of cloths. The stated timeframes are estimates.


   Amount
 needed for             1*             Minimum 5              12-22                1                 12-22
  one cycle

*Depending on the size of the cloth provided, and whether it is reused or disposed of.



Price for one
    item                               US $ 1.50-3       US $ 0.10-0.30       US $ 10-40        US $ 0.20-0.30
                 US $ 2 for 1m x
                      1.5m



 Estimated
cost for one          US $ 2           US $ 1.5-3         US $ 30-90           US $ 1-8           US $ 60-90
   year*
*Based on an average cycle length of 5 days and 13 menstrual cycles per year and 22 tampons/pads per cycle.


32
                                                                                         Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

                   Menstrual cloth          Reusable pad          Disposable pad         Menstrual cup               Tampon




Health risks*          Medium                  Medium                    Low                 Medium                 Medium


*Depending on context and general hygiene aspects.




Maintenance               High                   High                    Low                 Medium                    Low




  Learning
                       Medium                  Medium                    Low                    High                  High
   costs



                         Soap for
                                                Soap for
                       handwashing,
                                              handwashing,            Soap for               Soap for                  Soap for
  Supportive        laundry detergent,
                                           laundry detergent,       handwashing,           handwashing,             handwashing,
   supplies        bucket for washing,
                                          bucket for washing,     underwear, lidded          container           lidded bins inside
   needed          clothesline, storage
                                          clothes line, storage   bins inside toilet.       for boiling.              toilet stall.
                      bag, underwear,
                                             bag, underwear.
                         scissors.

                     Sufficient water
                                                                                              Water for
                   for washing (daily),     Sufficient water          Solid waste                                  Solid waste
                                                                                          sterilisation (one
  Supportive         private washing      for washing (daily),       management                                   management
                                                                                           time per cycle),
 environment          space, drying         private washing         system in place                              system in place
                                                                                           hygienic space
   needed          space, solid waste        space, drying        from on-site to end-                             from on-site
                                                                                         for storage, water
                      management                 space.                  point.                                   to end-point.
                                                                                          inside toilet stall.
                         system.



 Availability of
  local manu-
 facturers for
                          High                 Medium                 Medium                    Low                    Low
procurement *

*Depending on context and general hygiene aspects.




                                                                                                                                      33
   © UNICEF/UN0269641/Hajra
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




                            Monitoring and
                               learning




34
                                                                                      Guide to menstrual hygiene materials

Effective monitoring and evaluation of MHH interventions along a given theory of change
remains a priority globally, and generating evidence on materials and supplies can help
increase knowledge of this critical component.

Monitoring and evaluation is of course critical for accountability to children and their
caretakers, and to governments, but is also critical to improving the quality of UNICEF’s
work. There is much more to learn about increasing access to menstrual hygiene
materials and supplies – and UNICEF can help to build the global evidence base through
effective assessment, monitoring and evaluation. Some of the priority areas for research
surrounding increasing access to MHH materials and supplies were outlined by leading
MHM researchers and practitioners in 201610, and are outlined in Table II below.

With regard to menstrual hygiene materials and supply assistance, most monitoring may
be at the input or activity and output level – such as monitoring the number of women
and girls who received or were satisfied with supply assistance. In humanitarian settings,
monitoring might be done through quantitative post-distribution monitoring surveys, or
perhaps using a mix of methods described in the consultation section above. Ensure that
data are disaggregated by sex, age, and disability status.


Table II. MHH topics and research questions for adolescent girls (selection
of topics relevant to menstrual hygiene materials and supplies)
    Topic area               Research question - related to menstrual hygiene materials and supplies


   Environmental            What are cost-effective menstrual waste disposal systems?
   infrastructure           How can safe, hygienic, sustainable, and environmentally friendly disposal systems be developed?



                            How can programmes improve access to menstrual products, such as sanitary pads, other
                            absorbents, or menstrual cups, and availability of underwear?
                            Are certain MHM products only culturally acceptable in some countries?
                            How does culture or religion affect uptake?
                            Can acceptability and use be promoted globally?
      Hygiene
      products
                            How can programmes measure the benefits and risks of traditional hygiene materials (such
                            as cloth) in LMIC and support safe practices?


                            Can cluster randomised controlled trials define the cost-effectiveness of MHM products on
                            hard outcome measures?


                            Can cluster randomised controlled trials define the cost-effectiveness of MHM products on
                            hard outcome measures?


                            What health impact would MHM products have on reproductive tract infections, vaginal
    Girls’ health
                            discharge and odour, and urinary tract infections?


                            What impact would effective MHM products have in reducing transactional (or coerced) sex
                            to obtain money for sanitary pads?

                                                                                   Adapted from Phillips-Howard, P.A., et al. (2016)

10Phillips-Howard, P. A., Caruso, B., Torondel, B., Zulaika, G., Sahin, M., & Sommer, M. (2016). ‘Menstrual
hygiene management among adolescent schoolgirls in low-and middle-income countries: research priorities.’
In Global Health Action, 9(1), 33032.
Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5148805/


                                                                                                                                 35
Guide to menstrual hygiene materials




Annex I: Additional resources
  Author, title and link                     Relevance

  The Impact of Water, Sanitation and        This evidence paper looks at 10 areas identified by SHARE and
  Hygiene on Key Health and Social           UNICEF on which WASH can plausibly have a strong impact:
  Outcomes: Review of Evidence               diarrhoea, nutrition, complementary food hygiene, female
                                             psychosocial stress, violence, maternal and newborn health,
  UNICEF and SHARE Consortium (2016)         menstrual hygiene management, school attendance, oral vaccine
                                             performance, and neglected tropical diseases. The paper indicates
                                             where evidence-based consensus is emerging or has been established.


  Menstrual Hygiene Matters: A resource      This resource brings together accurate, straightforward, non-
  for improving menstrual hygiene            judgmental knowledge and practice on menstrual hygiene
  around the world                           programming from around the world to encourage the development
                                             of comprehensive and context-specific approaches to menstrual
  SHARE & WaterAid (2012)                    hygiene.
  Modules and Toolkits 3 Menstrual
  hygiene – sanitary protection              Module and toolkit 3 provide information on menstrual materials,
                                             supplies, and disposal.


  UNICEF Supply Manual                       Provides all resources to explain and support UNICEF’s Procurement
                                             Policies including links to other relevant procedures and principles.


  UNICEF Toolkit for working with Civil      Provides all resources to explain and support UNICEF’s Procedure for
  Society Organizations                      working with Civil Society Organizations with key reference documents
                                             for partnering with CSOs.


  An Opportunity to Address Menstrual        This report gives a concise overview of 1) the state of the evidence
  Health and Gender Equity: A Global         linking menstrual health to health, education, and equality outcomes;
  Menstrual Health Landscape Analysis        2) a brief landscape of the menstrual health sector, including areas
                                             of progress and existing gaps; and 3) conclusions and perspectives
  FSG (2016)                                 on opportunities for working in menstrual health. The report was
                                             prepared with support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. It
                                             is the result of a review of over 150 peer-reviewed articles and grey
                                             literature, interviews with 37 global experts, 70-plus interviews with
                                             experts and practitioners in India, Kenya, and Ethiopia, and a review
                                             of relevant programming focused on menstruation, MHM, and
                                             sexual and reproductive health and rights.


  Tools for Assessing Menstrual              In 2012, UNICEF and the Center for Global Safe Water at Emory
  Hygiene Management in Schools              University initiated a programme to support collaborative research
                                             focused on MHM in Bolivia, the Philippines, Rwanda and Sierra
  UNICEF and Emory University (2013)         Leone. The assessment results are now published as a series of
                                             reports. All of the tools presented here are meant to be used and
                                             adapted for assessments around the world.


  MHM in Emergencies Toolkit: Full           The MHM in Emergencies Toolkit provides streamlined guidance
  guide, mini-guide and training resources   to support organisations and agencies seeking to rapidly integrate
                                             MHM into existing programming across sectors and programme
  Columbia University and the IRC (2017)     phases. This toolkit was informed by an extensive desk review,
                                             qualitative assessments with a range of humanitarian actors and
                                             organisations, and direct discussions with girls and women living in
                                             emergency contexts and directly affected by this issue.




36
                                                                           Guide to menstrual hygiene materials


Violence, Gender & WASH: A                   This toolkit was developed in response to an acknowledgement
Practitioner’s Toolkit – Making water,       that although the lack of access to appropriate WASH services is
sanitation and hygiene safer through         not the root cause of violence, it can lead to increased vulnerabilities
improved programming and services.           to violence of varying forms. It includes tools like safety audits
                                             and transect walks that can be used with girls, women, and other
House, S., Ferron, S., Sommer, M., Cavill,   menstruators.
S. (2014)



UNICEF Guidance on WASH & Dignity            This guidance is meant for WASH and Child Protection specialists
Kits                                         who are procuring WASH & Dignity Kit – First Response (S9901153)
                                             through UNICEF Supply Division. The kit helps fulfil UNICEF’s
UNICEF (2018)                                commitment to provide gender-specific ‘non-food items’ (NFIs)
                                             to women and adolescent girls in line with their rights to health,
(Available internally to UNICEF only)        dignity and protection in emergencies.



Menstrual hygiene management in              This report details the status of MHM in schools in South Asia.
schools in South Asia: Synthesis report      Progress and gaps are identified in achieving sustainable and
                                             inclusive MHM services at scale, and the report draws together
UNICEF & WaterAid (2017)                     opportunities for further promoting and mainstreaming MHM in
                                             schools across South Asia.

                                             The findings are presented in an overall report, a summary, and 8
                                             country specific reports.


Menstrual Health Management in East          This review provides an overview of MHM policies and programmes
and Southern Africa: A Review Paper          in the Eastern and Southern Africa region, with a focus on education,
                                             school and community-based sexuality education, WASH, sexual
UNFPA (2018)                                 and reproductive health, workplace support and humanitarian
                                             programming, as well as opening up the discussion regarding
                                             marginalized groups of women and girls such as disabled, prisoners
                                             and transgender men. It addresses barriers and enablers for scalability
                                             of MHM programmes such as knowledge, attitudes, and cultural
                                             perceptions, availability of menstrual products and supplies and
                                             sanitation facilities as well as policy.


Supporting the Rights of Girls and           A comprehensive overview and analysis of the experiences of girls
Women through Menstrual Hygiene              and women, to establish the current status of MHM programming
Management in the East Asia and              and action across the East Asia and the Pacific region. The review
Pacific Region: Realities, Progress and      not only focuses on the school context linked to WASH in Schools
                                             programming, but also explores MHM in relation to out-of-school
Opportunities
                                             youth, as well as MHM at community level, in humanitarian
                                             contexts and in the workplace.
UNICEF (2016)
                                             The findings are presented in two documents:
                                             (1) A regional synthesis report titled “Realities, Progress and
                                             Opportunities”
                                             (2) An implementation guidance note with selected good practices
                                             titled “Regional Good Practice Guidance Note”




                                                                                                                       37
For more information on this publication and menstrual hygiene management as part of WASH in schools
programmes, contact Brooke Yamakoshi at UNICEF, byamakoshi@unicef.org
