The OB/GYN Survival

           Guide

An Introduction to Obstetrics and
          Gynecology
  at the University of Michigan




                                    1
This handbook was written by University of

Michigan residents and faculty for University of

Michigan students, new residents and other

guests to the department. Some information may

not apply to off-site locations; however, we hope

all will find it helpful.
           Revised 2013: Maya Hammoud, MD
           Revised 2011
           Michael Lanham, MD
           Helen Kang Morgan, MD

           Revised 2008
           Kirsten Salmeen, MD
           Katy Penington, MD

           Revised 2005
           Deborah Berman, MD
           Jeness Connell,MD
           Sangeeta Senapati, MD

           Revised 2002
           Aletha Akers, MD
           Khurram Rehman, MD

           Written 1997
           Shereen Binno, MD
                                               2
                 Table of Contents
INTENDED LEARNING OUTCOMES……………………………..6

OBSTETRICS
Logistics………………………………………………………………10
Conference Schedule…………………………………………….....14
Student Expectations……………………………………………..…14
Documentation: OB H&P, Labor Progress Note………………….18
Delivery Note…………………………………………………………22
C-Section Note………………………………………………….…...23
Postpartum Note…………………………………………………..…24
Fetal Heart Rate Tracing…………………………………………....25
OB Patient Presentations…………………………………….……..29
OB Paperwork: Orders………………………………………………31
Discharge Prescriptions……………………………………………..33
Discharge Issues………………………………………………….....34
Postpartum Contraception………………………………………….35
Breastfeeding Basics………………………………………………..37
Triage………………………………………………………………….38
Selected Ob Topics: Chorioamnionitis, Endometritis, PPROM,
Postpartum Hemorrhage……………………………………………39
Basic Prenatal Care…………………………………….……...……43
Prenatal Care for Patients with BMI>40…………………………..44
Prenatal care for Diabetic Patients………………………………..45
Diabetics in Labor……………………………………….…………..46
GBS Protocol…………………………………………………….…..47
Antenatal Testing Guidelines………………………………………48
OB Acronyms………………………………………………………..49
Radiation Exposure in Pregnancy…………………………………50


                                                        3
GYNECOLOGY
Logistics…………………………………………………………….52
Student expectations………………………………………………55
GYN Paperwork……………………………………………………58
Pre-Op Resident and Student Form……………………………..58
Gyn H&P…………………………………………………………….60
Progress Notes……………………………………………………..63
OR Note…………………………………….……………………….64
Post Op Check……………………………….……………………..64
Admit Orders………………………………………………………..64
Calculating I/Os……………………………………………………..66
Inpatient Presentations…………………………………………….67
Selected Teaching Outlines: Ectopic Pregnancy, PID, Uterine
Fibroids, Hysteroscopy, D&C, Tubal Ligation,
Hysterectomy……………….……………….………………………68

ST. JOSEPH MERCY HOSPITAL
General information………………………………………………….72
Lectures and Conferences…..……………...………………………76
Obstetrics……………………………………………………………..77
Gynecology…………………………………………………………..80
Oncology……………………………………………………...………81
Night Float & Weekend Call……………….………………….……82
Ambulatory Clinic…………………………………………………….83
Scheduling……………………………………………………………85
Writing Notes…………………………………………………………87
End of Clerkship……………………………………………………..88

Useful Numbers…………………………………………………….89
Directions to commonly used locations……………………….90



                                                          4
               WELCOME!

 Welcome to Obstetrics and Gynecology
     at the University of Michigan!

   We are excited to have you join our
 obstetrics and gynecology teams. This
booklet was written to orient students, new
    residents, and other guests to our
               department.

The obstetrics and gynecology services are
   clinically separate and are presented
          separately in this guide.




                                          5
     Obstetrics and Gynecology M3 Clerkship
     Intended Learning Outcomes 2013-2014
1. You should plan to complete all of the ILOs. Even if you do not
participate in every subspecialties listed, you are still responsible
for completing the associated ILOs.
2. If you do not encounter a patient, participate in a didactic
session or a simulation corresponding to a particular ILO, please
go to APGO.org, click on “Objectives.” read the associated
outline/sample case and answer the questions.
4. This is not a substitute for completing your CLTP. You must
also complete your CLTP as you go.

Gynecology (Outpatient Clinic)
1. Develop competence in the medical interview and physical
examination of women and will incorporate ethical, social and
diversity perspectives to provide culturally competent health care.
           □ Perform pelvic exam (including speculum and
bimanual examination)
           □ Perform clinical breast exam
           □ Conduct, record and present GYN patient H & P
2. Apply recommended prevention strategies to women
throughout the lifespan.
           □ Annual well-woman exam
3. Recognize your role as a leader and advocate for women.
(one of following)
           □ Domestic violence screening, teen pregnancy
4. Describe menstrual cycle physiology, discuss puberty and
menopause, and explain normal and abnormal bleeding.
           □ Menopause/perimenopause
           □ Abnormal uterine bleeding

                                                                    6
5. Develop a thorough understanding of contraception, including
abortion and sterilization.
           □ Contraceptive counseling
6. Provide a preliminary assessment of patients with sexual
concerns.
           □ Take a sexual history
7. Demonstrate knowledge of common benign gynecological
conditions.
           □ Vulvar/vaginal benign disease
           □ Fibroids
           □ Endometriosis
8. Formulate a differential diagnosis of the acute abdomen and
chronic pelvic pain.
           □ Pelvic pain
           □ Ectopic pregnancy
9. Describe the etiology and evaluation of infertility
10. Describe common breast conditions and outline the
evaluation of breast complaints.
           □ Perform clinical breast examination
           □ Breast mass
           □ Nipple discharge
           □ Mastitis
11. Pelvic Organ Prolapse-
           □ Discuss the levels of pelvic organ support
           □ Identify symptoms
           □ Identify risk factors
           □ Identify surgical and non-surgical treatment options
for prolapse
12. Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms
           □ Take a history regarding voiding and storage
disorders to identify symptoms of irritation, obstruction, and
incontinence

                                                                    7
           □ Define types of urinary incontinence: stress, urge,
mixed, overflow, functional, continuous
           □ Explain primary evaluation for urinary incontinence:
urinalysis, post void residual, voiding diary, stress test
           □ Identify treatments for Incontinence: physical
therapy, behavioral, medications, pessary, surgery
           □ UTI management- antibiotic choice, prophylaxis
13. Describe gynecologic malignancies including risk factors,
signs and symptoms and initial evaluation.
           □ Abnormal Pap smear
           □ Postmenopausal bleeding
           □ Adnexal mass/cyst
Gynecology Surgery
1. Gynecology Perioperative Care-
           □ Perform pelvic exam and digital rectal exam. (may be
under anesthesia)
           □ Insert Foley catheter
           □ Demonstrate ability to write the following notes-
                       i.   GYN preoperative note, including
appropriate studies and prophylaxis
                       ii. GYN operative note
                       iii. GYN postoperative note
                      iv. GYN postoperative progress note
2. Demonstrate familiarity with gynecologic procedures.
           □ Observe hysterectomy
           □ Observe laparoscopy
           □ Observe other gynecology procedure (enter below)
                       i.   ____________________
                       ii. ____________________
                       iii. ____________________



                                                               8
Obstetrics
1. Demonstrate knowledge of preconception care including the
impact of genetics, medical conditions and environmental factors
on maternal health and fetal development.
       □ Preconception care
       □ 1st trimester care
       □ Prenatal diagnosis
2. Explain the normal physiologic changes of pregnancy including
interpretation of common diagnostic studies.
           □ New OB prenatal visit
           □ Routine prenatal care follow-up visit
           □ Conduct, record and present OB patient history
3. Describe common problems in obstetrics.
           □ Diabetes in pregnancy
           □ Preeclampsia/eclampsia
           □ 3rd trimester bleeding
           □ Peripartum infection
           □ 1st trimester bleeding
4. Demonstrate knowledge of intrapartum care.
           □ Clinical course of labor
           □ Premature rupture of membranes (PROM)
           □ Preterm labor (PTL)
           □ Normal Spontaneous Vaginal Birth (NSVD),
participate/observe
           □ Observe perineal laceration repair
           □ Write delivery note
5. Demonstrate knowledge of postpartum care
           □ Postpartum discharge instructions
           □ Current breastfeeding recommendations
           □ Postpartum hemorrhage
           □ Write postpartum note
           □ Present postpartum patient

                                                              9
OBSTETRICS
Welcome to Labor and Delivery (L&D) at the University of
Michigan. This portion of the guide is designed to give you an
idea of how L&D works and what to expect.

For medical students, the goals are for you to become familiar
with normal and high-risk pregnancies, to understand normal and
abnormal labor courses, to understand and be able to recognize
obstetric emergencies, to understand when and why cesarean
sections are performed, and hopefully to deliver some babies!

GENERAL INFORMATION

Logistics of L&D
                                      th
Labor and Delivery is located on the 9 floor of the CS Mott
Children’s and VonVoightlander Women’s Hospital.

There are five services who admit patients to Labor and Delivery:
1.UMOG (University of Michigan Ob-Gyn)
2. MFM (Maternal Fetal Medicine)
3. WH (Women’s Health),\
4. CNM (Certified Nurse Midwives)
5. FMB (Family/Mother/Baby)

 As a student on Ob-Gyn, you will follow patients belonging to the
UMOG, MFM, and WH services. Generally, students are not
involved in caring for patients on the CNM or FMB services unless
those patients require intervention from the obstetricians.



                                                                 10
Team Members

         Students
         OB/GYN Residents
         Other Residents (Emergency Medicine, Family
          Medicine)
         Attendings
         Triage CNMs

Students:
The M3 Clerkship Director assigns students to the L&D service for
blocks of time. During that time, you will be an integral part of the
team. There are also occasionally M4 MFM sub-interns on Labor
and Delivery. There is a floating pager number 35489 that should
be signed out to one M3 per shift.

Ob-Gyn Residents:
There are generally six OB residents on the L&D team every
month.
                         th
There is a day-chief (a 4 year resident) who is responsible for
the entire unit. He or she runs the floor Monday through Friday
                                                 rd
during the day. There is also a night-chief (a 3 year resident)
who is responsible for the unit Sunday through Thursday at night.
Over the weekend, (Friday night, Saturday for 24 hours, Sunday
                                                rd    th
day), the chief position is shared by rotating 3 and 4 year
residents.

There is one junior resident who works Sunday through Thursday
nights. There are three other junior residents who cover the floor
as well as high risk obstetrical clinics Monday through Friday
                                                                  11
during the days. On the weekends (Friday night, Saturday for 24
hours, and Sunday day) there is one junior resident on the floor.

Residents are responsible for all the UMOG, WH, and MFM
patients on the floor. The chief resident also is responsible for
knowing other patients on the floor (CNM and FMB). Residents
will make every attempt to attend all deliveries on the UMOG,
WH, and MFM services.

Other Residents:
There are occasionally Family Medicine or Emergency Medicine
residents who rotate with the OB team on Labor and Delivery.
They generally help manage the lower-risk laboring patients.
Their goals are generally to gain experience with normal vaginal
deliveries and lower-risk obstetrical issues.

Attendings:
There is always an attending in-house 24 hours per day, 7 days
per week known as the “Supercall.” He or she staffs the UMOG
and MFM services and serves as backup for any emergencies or
other issues. There is also always a WH attending on-call who
may or may not be in-house depending on the status of the WH
service. There is always an MFM backup faculty who is available
for back-up or for high-risk OB consults. Attendings are present at
every delivery and every cesarean section .

Triage Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs):
There is a CNM in triage 24 hours per day, 7 days per week who
primarily evaluates any OB triage patient. They then discuss
patients with either the chief resident on-call or with the WH
attending as indicated. They are also available for back-up in the


                                                                    12
event of multiple simultaneous deliveries or other emergencies
requiring assistance.

L&D Flow
Each day (including weekends) starts with postpartum rounds,
which are to be completed, including notes and orders, before
board signout or any teaching. The residents generally gather in
the boardroom at approximately 6:00 AM to divide the postpartum
patients and begin pre-rounding.

Board sign-out occurs in the boardroom every day at 7:00 AM,
except on Thursdays when it starts at 6:30AM (to accommodate
grand-rounds). There is teaching at 6:50AM on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday in the boardroom. Sign-out will start with
the night-chief and night-junior signing out the high risk patients,
antepartum patients, and laboring patients. The OR schedule for
the day is then discussed. Finally, each postpartum patient is
discussed. The day-chief and the attending attempt to incorporate
as much teaching as possible into board sign-out, however, the
business-to-teaching ratio is heavily dependent on the volume of
patients.

After board sign-out and any conferences (see below for
conference schedule), some residents will leave the floor to
attend clinics; however, at least one junior resident will stay on the
floor. There is a schedule posted in the board room so you can
see what resident is staying on the floor. On most days, there are
scheduled cesarean sections or other scheduled procedures
(postpartum tubal ligations, cerclage placements, etc.). These
procedures will start as soon as possible after board sign-out or
conferences.


                                                                   13
Otherwise, the flow of the day will depend on the number of
patients in labor or needing care. Some days, there is quite a bit
of down time and many days you will run nonstop. The chief will
always try and get everyone on the team a chance to get lunch,
but you are most likely to be involved in the most action if you do
not have to leave the floor, so it might be a smart idea to bring
some food that you can eat between deliveries.

The board is signed out again every day at 6:00 PM. At evening
rounds, we do not routinely discuss all the postpartum patients.

 Conferences
Day                     Conferences
Monday 8:00 AM          Pericu Conference (OB Board Room)
Monday 5:00 PM          M&M (MCHC Auditorium)
Wednesday 8:00 AM       Strip Rounds (OB Board Room)
Wednesday 3:00 PM       Resident CORE (MFM Conf. Room)
Thursday 7:30 AM        Grand Rounds (MCHC Auditorium)
Thursday 12:30 PM       Teratology Conference (MFM Conf. Room
                        – clinic residents)
Friday 8:00 AM          High Risk Conference (VVL clinic Hall A )

STUDENT EXPECTATIONS

Pre-Rounds:
The residents will typically help the students determine which
postpartum patients to see, however, each student typically sees
2-3 patients. You should preferentially see patients whose
deliveries you participated in, however, if there are no postpartum
patients in-house who you know, you may be asked to see other
patients. These patients still present valuable learning
                                                                 14
opportunities. Please see below for details on postpartum rounds
and documentation, however, you should plan to have your
patients seen and their notes written in TraceVue by 6:45 AM (or
6:35AM when teaching starts at 6:50AM), so that the resident can
go through the note and the plan with you. You will not be able to
write notes during board sign out.


Rounds:
You will be expected to present the patients on whom you
rounded during morning board sign-out. Please see below for
details on presenting postpartum patients. Sometimes the
residents forget which patients have been seen by students, so
feel free to interrupt – if you saw the patient, you should present
her.

The Workday:
After board sign-out, you may participate in Cesarean sections,
be involved in caring for laboring patients and participate in their
deliveries. The floor can occasionally be quite slow, so if you are
assigned to a place that does not have much going on, you
should check with the residents about other opportunities. On the
other hand, if there is a lot going on and there are clinical
opportunities that are being missed because you are involved in
something else, let the other students know.

When assigned to the low risk side, you should divide the laboring
patients among the students and follow them closely throughout
their labor and delivery course. You should divide the multiparous
patients and nulliparous patients evenly, as the multiparous
patients are much more likely to deliver during your shift. In
general, you should see each laboring patient every two hours to

                                                                  15
check on her progress. Sometimes you will do cervical exams
(although you should never do a cervical exam without a resident
or attending), and other times you will review the strip and check
on the patient without doing a cervical exam. You should always
send the junior resident a page when you have seen a patient if
there are any pertinent updates. You should write a progress note
in TraceVue whenever you see a patient with a resident or
attending (see below for details on labor progress notes),
although you do not need to write a note if you have stopped in to
check on a patient alone.

It is highly recommended that you follow at least one patient from
admission to delivery including assisting the patient in the second
(pushing) stage of labor. You should not attend a delivery without
having met the patient first. After each delivery, you should be
able to completely describe the labor course and curve, interpret
the fetal heart rate strip, explain the labor management plan, and
write the delivery note.

If you are going to participate in scheduled cesarean sections,
you should look the patient up in TraceVue, determine the reason
she is having a cesarean section and review her history.
Important things to know about a patient before a cesarean
section (in addition to the indication for the surgery) are: her pre-
operative hematocrit, the location of the placenta, if there were
any complications in any prior cesarean sections, any other
abdominal surgeries and the presentation of the fetus. You should
meet the patient in the recovery area before she is taken back to
the OR. During the cesarean section, you will be asked to assist
with retraction, and may be invited to sew fascia or staple the skin
if time permits. After the procedure, you should write an operative
note in Tracevue and help move the patient out of the OR.

                                                                  16
If you are assigned to triage, you should introduce yourself to the
Certified Nurse Midwives, and they will direct you from there.
Triage is a wonderful opportunity to learn about how women
present in labor and about other pregnancy-related problems.

In general, the more time you spend out on the floor, the more
you’ll see and do. No active patient issues or deliveries occur in
the boardroom. Follow the junior resident around as he or she is
seeing patients, as you will have many more learning
opportunities. Lots of teaching and clarification can happen in the
halls, walking from one room to the next. Not only do the
residents and faculty appreciate your evaluations, input and time,
but the patients also value your efforts.

Lectures/Conferences:
It is mandatory that you attend all your scheduled student
lectures, small groups, and conferences including all listed above
except for resident core. These preclude any clinical
responsibilities you have on the floor. You should notify the
residents of the times you need to be leave each day to ensure
that you are not held up and late for conferences.

We all work together as a team. Communication with attendings,
residents, anesthesia and nurses is the key to a smoothly run
unit. If you have questions about where to go or what to do, ask
anyone; we’re all happy to help.




                                                                 17
DOCUMENTATION

All charting for inpatients goes in TraceVue under the “Progress
Notes” Tab, in admission/labor section (i.e., the pregnant woman
entering the hospital icon). Triage notes are written in the
“Progress Notes” Tab in the prenatal section (i.e., the growing
pregnant woman).

H&Ps
Any patient who is admitted needs an H&P in TraceVue. For
uncomplicated patients admitted in labor, this tab, in addition to a
brief summary in the “progress notes” tab, is sufficient. Patients
admitted to the East side will require the “Admission” tab to be
filled out, a more thorough note in TraceVue and an H&P in
CareWeb. Any patient admitted to the East side should have an
updated “Problem List,” as this is our primary method for
communicating with our colleagues who are taking over the
service from us at the end of our shift.

FULL OB H&P
Introduction: Age, gravidity and parity (gravidity is the total
number of pregnancies (twins count as one), parity is in the
following format: T – term deliveries, P – preterm deliveries (20 to
37 weeks), A – abortions, spontaneous (< 20 weeks) or elective,
including ectopic pregnancies, and L – living children), weeks of
gestation, presenting problem.
HPI: What brought the patient into triage? Labor symptoms,
bleeding, leakage of fluid, pre-eclamptic symptoms, reduced fetal
movement. For contractions, ask about how long the contractions
have been felt, how far apart they are, and how strong they are
subjectively, eg could you sleep through the contractions? Are
you ‘breathing through’ the contractions? Are they getting

                                                                  18
stronger? For bleeding, assess onset, subjective amount,
whether bright red or not, if there is any associated abdominal
pain, cramping or contractions. For possible ruptured
membranes, ask about the onset of leakage, the amount and
color of the fluid, if there is ongoing drainage of fluid?
Current pregnancy: Try to obtain a history of important events in
this pregnancy. Establish dating of the pregnancy (by last
menstrual period, first or second trimester ultrasound), and ask if
there have been any problems. Was the pregnancy planned, and
did pre-conceptional care occur? Ask about ultrasounds and any
abnormal tests. Ask about amniocentesis/chorionic villus
sampling for mothers over 35, abnormal First Trimester Screen or
Quad test, if there are fetal anomalies, or if baby is growth-
restricted.
Prenatal Labs: Blood type / Antibody screen / Rubella immunity /
VDRL / Hep B surface Ag / 1 hour glucose tolerance test / Pap /
GC and Chlamydia / GBS screening / hemoglobin
electrophoreses / amniocentesis / quad test / chorionic villous
sampling (these can be obtained from TraceVue or CareWeb).
Past OB History: For each pregnancy, ask about the date of
delivery, gestational age (express in weeks not months), type of
delivery (spontaneous vaginal, vacuum, forceps or Cesarean
section), sex, birth weight, and any complications in pregnancy or
labor. For C-sections ask the patient what the reason for the C-
section was, as well as if the patient was told she would need a
repeat C-section (? classical C-section). Ask specifically about
other pregnancies, such as miscarriages (spontaneous
abortions), abortions (elective abortions), or ectopic pregnancies.
Don’t assume that the patient’s partner or family members are
aware of previous losses or elective abortions. Some patients will
specifically ask you not to mention these.


                                                                19
Past Gyn History: Ask about abnormal Pap smears, sexually
transmitted infections, GYN surgeries. Ask myomectomy patients
if they were told they needed a C-section in the future. Cone
biopsy and LEEP procedures may cause cervical incompetence
or cervical scarring, so don't forget to ask about these. Also ask
about menarche and regularity of menses and a sexual history
when appropriate (i.e., the patient’s family is not in the room).
Past Medical History: Ask about diabetes, hypertension, seizure
disorders, depression, etc. Include sickle cell disease/trait for
African-American patients.
Past Surgical History: Especially abdominal surgery.
Drugs / Allergies
Family History: Ask about abnormal births, genetic disorders
such as cystic fibrosis, and about hemoglobinopathies for non-
caucasian patients.
Social History: Include smoking, alcohol and drug use pre-
pregnancy and during the current pregnancy.
Physical Exam: Start with vitals (BP, pulse, temp, respiratory
rate). Comment on fetal heart tones, and contraction pattern (e.g.
FHT 130 reactive, toco – contractions q 3 – 5 minutes). Examine
heart, lungs, breast exam (only for initial prenatal visit, or
postpartum fever), abdomen, extremities (edema, calf tenderness,
reflexes). Always do Leopold’s maneuvers for fetal lie and
presentation, as well as an estimate of fetal weight – try to
estimate to the nearest 500g (roughly 1 pound). Speculum exam,
if appropriate, eg for Pap smear, GC and chlamydia in the
prenatal clinic, or in triage to confirm rupture of membranes, or
obtain cultures and fetal fibronectin assay in preterm labor.
Vaginal exam, if appropriate (always with a resident or staff
present) consists of cervical dilatation and effacement, and station
of the presenting part, written 4cm / 50% / -1 station. Note if clear
fluid, bleeding, or meconium if the membranes are ruptured.

                                                                  20
Presentation may be confirmed on vaginal exam and/or
ultrasound.
It is very good practice to perform a brief ultrasound to assess
presentation unless you are very certain on exam.
Assessment: A one or two sentence summary of the patient, eg
“25 year old G2 P1001 at 33 weeks 6 days by 1st trimester
ultrasound, in preterm labor following preterm premature rupture
of membranes yesterday at 6pm.
Plan: Depends on the patient, but you should always formulate a
plan on your own before presenting. This is the best way to learn
management of obstetrical issues.

Labor Progress Note:
Subjective: Pain? Bleeding? Other issues?
Objective: Vitals (although “afeb/VSS” is a convenient shorthand,
in general, the actual vitals should be written), FHTs: comment
on baseline, variability, presence of accelerations or
decelerations, Toco: contraction frequency, rate of pitocin (if
used); if IUPC in place, include montevideo units , SVE (sterile
vaginal exam): dilation, effacement, station. If medication was
placed, amniotomy performed (comment on fluid color), or fetal
position is checked, theses can also be noted here.
Assessment: X year old G#P# at X weeks, admitted for (SOL,
SROM, IOL, etc). Fetal status reassuring (if it is).
Plan: Type of action taken while assessing patient (AROM, IUPC,
FSE, type of anesthesia given, etc), start or stop pitocin, patient to
begin pushing, taking patient for operative delivery (cesarean
section, forceps, vacuum), etc.




                                                                   21
Delivery Note:

Stage I: (Beginning of labor through pushing stage)
X year old G#P# at X weeks, admitted for (SOL, SROM, IOL, etc).
Pitocin was/was not used for augmentation. The patient received
(morphine, spinal, epidural, etc.) for analgesia. AROM/SROM was
performed/occurred at X time. Amniotic fluid was (clear,
meconium-stained, bloody, etc). Antibiotics were/were not
required (due to chorio, for GBS prophylaxis, etc). Include any
other significant events during labor.

Stage II: (Pushing through delivery)
-Patient progressed to complete at < > time and pushed for < >
hours, to deliver from a < > position (e.g. ROA, OP)
-If an episiotomy was cut, state what type and the indication.
- If a vacuum or forceps were used, state what type and the
indication. Also describe the number of pulls required (e.g. pulls
with 3 contractions), and fetal station and position.
- Mouth and nose were/were not bulb suctioned at the perineum.
- Note presence of nuchal/body cords and maneuvers needed to
resolve them (e.g. easily reduced or clamped and cut at the
perineum)
- Body delivered without difficulty (or, if there was a shoulder
dystocia, describe the maneuvers performed to relieve the
dystocia and the length of time to deliver the baby)
-Note if the baby was given directly to the mom or to the
pediatricians. If pediatricians were present, explain why they were
called (e.g. for mec, for maternal chorio, etc.)
-Note the baby’s weight, apgars and umbilical cord gases




                                                                22
Stage III: (Delivery of baby through delivery of placenta/repair)
-Describe how the placenta delivered (spontaneously or requiring
manual removal), how the placenta looked, including whether or
not it was intact, insertion of cord, number of vessels, and any
other notations made at the time of delivery.
-Describe any perineal lacerations (location, degree)
-Describe the type of repair performed including the type of suture
(e.g. 3-0 vicryl) and any extra analgesia provided (e.g. 1%
lidocaine for local anesthesia).
Results of rectal exam, if performed.
Estimated blood loss
Physicians present, Rubella status and Rh type.

C-Section Note:
Preop Diagnosis:
Postop Diagnosis:
Procedure:
Surgeon:
Residents:
Medical Students:
Type of Anesthesia (e.g. spinal, epidural, GA):
IVF:
UO:
EBL:
Indication:
Findings:
- A __gm male/female infant was delivered from a __ position
(e.g. ROA, OP, etc.) with Apgars of __/__.
- Umbilical cord gases were:
- Comment on appearance of uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes.


                                                                23
- Comment on placenta (intact, insertion of cord, number of
vessels, and any other notations made at the time of delivery).
- Any other interesting findings.
Complications:
Specimens:
Disposition: To recovery room in stable condition.


Postpartum Note:
Subjective: Include pain control, ambulation, voiding, PO intake,
lochia (postpartum vaginal bleeding) (ie. is she having normal
bleeding, or problems with heavy bleeding?), passing flatus,
breast or bottle feeding (and if breast breastfeeding, is it going
well?), contraception plans.
Objective: Vital signs, including I/O for postop patients (although
some may write “afeb, VSS” it is good practice to get in the habit
of writing out the vital signs)
Physical exam including: general appearance, heart/lungs,
abdominal exam (soft, NT, ND, +BS), fundal position/tone (eg.
fundus firm below umbilicus), inspect abdominal incision if patient
has had c-section (dressing clean/dry/intact, or incision intact, no
exudates or erythema), perineum, if indicated (sometimes done
by resident if problems/pain or with large lacerations, sulcal tears,
forceps or vacuum delivery – students do not need to do this part
of the exam), extremities (lack of calf tenderness)
Labs when appropriate: (C-section patients have a CBC drawn
on POD#1)
Assessment: X year old G#P# -> # + 1 (e.g. if pt just had her
second baby, you would write G2P1->2), post-partum/post-
operative day #X from a NSVD/FAVD/VAVD/C-section, (and if
operative delivery: performed due to X) who is recovering
appropriately or with X problem.

                                                                  24
Plan: Depends on the patient and situation. Generally, you may
include:
-Breast/bottle feeding going well/poorly
-Contraception plan (eg. Deferred, Micronor, IUD at postpartum
visit, etc.)
-Rh status and rubella; comment if given RhoGAM and/or
Rubella vaccination (if appropriate)
-Anticipated date for discharge
-Anticipated discharge medications (generally iron, motrin, colace,
+/- narcotic, +/- contraception)
-Follow up with VNA, follow up with OB in 6 weeks postpartum

FETAL HEART TRACINGS

Internal versus external monitoring:
External monitors are most commonly used to monitor both the
mother's contraction pattern and the fetal heart rate (FHR)
pattern. External fetal heart rate monitors use doppler technology
to monitor fetal heart rate. This is sufficient in most cases.
However, sometimes you want a more direct assessment of the
fetal heart rate. You may consider placing an FSE (fetal scalp
electrode) for internal monitoring when: the patient is obese and
external monitoring difficult, the patient is tachycardic and it is
difficult to differentiate between maternal and fetal pulse, when
the fetal heart rate tracing is non-reassuring and you need a more
direct and constant assessment to help with your management
decisions, or when you are having trouble keeping the fetal
tracing continuous for any reason. A maternal pulse-oximeter,
which can be continuously recorded, can also be helpful in
differentiating between maternal and fetal pulses.



                                                                25
The external contraction monitor (tocodynamometer or toco for
short) measures changes in the shape of the mother's abdomen
to identify when contractions occur. As you can imagine, anything
that causes a change in the mother's abdomen will also cause the
toco to register. Therefore, normal breathing, movement in bed,
vomiting, walking, external compression of the abdomen, etc. may
all cause changes in an external monitor. Usually, external toco
is sufficient. However, you may consider placement of an
intrauterine pressure catheter (IUPC) when the patient is in the
active phase of labor but is not progressing or when the FHR
tracing is non-reassuring and you want to know the exact
relationship between decelerations and contractions. An IUPC is
also necessary if you wish to perform an amnioinfusion for any
reason. IUPCs are long, thin plastic tubes with a pressure sensor
at their tip that are placed into the uterus. Care should be taken
during placement to avoid the placenta, as placental abruption
may be a complication of IUPC placement. Amniotomy (or
previously ruptured membranes) is necessary for IUPC
placement. IUPCs are convenient because, in contrast to an
external toco, they allow one to assess the strength of a uterine
contraction. To determine if contraction strength is adequate to
cause cervical dilation, the patient must first be in the active
phase of labor (prior to the active phase, contraction strength
does not have a direct correlation with cervical change). After
the IUPC is in place and functioning well, isolate a ten-minute
timeframe on the tracing and count and sum the number of boxes
beneath each contraction above the baseline. Each box
represents 10 montevideo units. A value of >180-200mVU
indicates adequate contraction strength to create cervical change.




                                                               26
Contraction Pattern:
When assessing the contraction pattern, know that contractions
are recorded on the lower half of the monitoring strip. Notice that
the strip has light and dark red lines. From one dark red line to
the next represents a one-minute interval. Thus, count the
number of dark red lines to determine how far apart the
contractions are. In a normal labor pattern, a patient typically has
regular contractions every ~ 2-5 minutes.

Abnormal contraction patterns include:
Coupling: 2 contractions coming very close together (e.g. 30
seconds) with a long space between the next set of 2
contractions. Triplets, quadruplets, etc. are also sometimes seen
during labor.
Uterine tachysystole: 5+ contractions in 10 minutes (< 1.5 minutes
between contractions) with regularity, but without changes in the
fetal heart rate tracing.
Uterine hyperstimulation: 5+ contractions in 10 minutes (< 1.5
minutes between contractions) with regularity and with associated
non-reassuring fetal heart rate tracing.

Fetal Heart Rate Pattern:
To describe a fetal heart rate tracing, discuss each of the
following components:
Baseline: normal is 110-160s
Variability: refers to variability in the heart rate. Note that the
distance between two small, horizontal lines on the monitoring
strip is equivalent to 10.
Absent: refers to a flat tracing
Minimal: 0-5 beats per minute
Moderate: 5-25 beats per minute
Marked: >25 beats per minute

                                                                      27
Accelerations: rises above baseline in the FHR
Decelerations: dips below baseline in the FHR
Variable decelerations: Variable decelerations are characterized
by sharp decline below baseline with rapid return to baseline.
They are classically “V” shaped. These can occur before, after, or
with a contraction. These are due to umbilical cord compression
and usually are not associated with fetal hypoxemia.

Early decelerations: Early decelerations by definition occur with
contractions and the slope mirrors the contraction. There is a
slow decline below the baseline with slow return to baseline with
the nadir occurring at the exact same time as the peak of the
contraction. The fetal heart rate returns to baseline at the same
time as the contraction ends. These are due to head
compression and are not associated with fetal hypoxemia.
Late decelerations: Late decelerations are decelerations in the
fetal heart rate that occur after the start of a contraction and do
not return to baseline until after a contraction has ended. These
are usually due to utero-placental insufficiency. In contrast to
variable or early decelerations, recurrent and persistent late-
decelerations can be associated with fetal hypoxemia and warrant
intervention.
Bradycardia: Bradycardia is defined as a deceleration in the fetal
heart rate for greater than 10 minutes.
If a prolonged or sudden deceleration occurs, stop. Think
logically about what could be the cause: hypotension from a
recent epidural placement, uterine hyperstimulation, fetal
manipulation, umbilical cord prolapse, etc. The following should
all be done together in order to attempt intrauterine resuscitation
of the fetus: turn off pitocin infusion if one has been running,
reposition the patient to her left side or knee-chest position, which
maximizes cardiac output, add supplemental oxygen by face

                                                                  28
mask, give a fluid bolus if hypotension is a possible etiology,
consider ephedrine administration if hypotension is still
suspected, do a vaginal exam to rule out cord prolapse or rapid
fetal head descent and to assess progress in labor. Consider
terbutaline 0.25 mg subcutaneously for tetanic contractions.
Always remember, call for help and do it early. Consider
activating the birth center pager and moving to the OR if a fetal
heart rate deceleration does not appear to resolve with the above
interventions in 2-3 minutes.



OB PATIENT PRESENTATIONS

Below are example patient presentations for various types of
situations. All the information to be included should be available in
the patient’s delivery note or other TraceVue notes.

Postpartum Vaginal Delivery:
“Ms. Smith is a 27yo Gravida 2 Para 1 now 2 who is postpartum
day number one after a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. (If
there were any complications in her pregnancy, put them here...
e.g., her pregnancy was complicated by insulin-requiring
gestational diabetes, which was well-controlled.) Her labor course
and delivery were uncomplicated (or if they were complicated,
explain how, e.g., her delivery was complicated by postpartum
hemorrhage requiring methergine and hemabate). She is feeling
well this morning. She has minimal pain, minimal lochia and is
voiding and ambulating. She is breastfeeding without difficulty.
She has been afebrile. BP range, pulse range, urine output. Her
physical exam was unremarkable. Her fundus was firm and 2
finger breadths below the umbilicus. She plans to use Micronor

                                                                  29
for contraception. We will plan to discharge her when she is 24
hours postpartum. She will follow-up in 6 weeks for a postpartum
visit.”
Postpartum Operative Vaginal Delivery:
“Ms. Smith is a 27yo Gravida 2 Para 1 now 2 who is postpartum
day number one status post forceps (or vacuum) assisted vaginal
delivery secondary to arrest of descent. A mediolateral
episiotomy was/was not cut. A < > degree perineal laceration
was sustained and repaired. She is doing well this morning. Her
pain is well controlled, she is having minimal lochia and she is
voiding without difficulty. On exam, she has been afebrile, BPs,
Pulse, Urine output. Her fundus is firm and below the umbilicus.
There is no evidence of hematoma on vaginal exam. (This exam
would need to have been performed with a physician.) She plans
to use condoms for contraception. She was advised of the need
to keep her stools soft and we discussed using miralax and
mineral oil as needed. We plan to discharge her when she is 24
hours postpartum. She will follow-up in 6 weeks for a postpartum
visit.”

Postpartum Cesarean Delivery:
“Ms. Smith is a 27yo Gravida 2 Para 1 now 2 who is postoperative
day number one status post a low transverse cesarean section
secondary to arrest of dilation. She is doing well this morning and
is breastfeeding, ambulating, and urinating without difficulty
(alternately, the patient’s Foley catheter may still be in place –
watch for that). Her pain is well-controlled on PO pain
medication. She is afebrile, BP, Pulse, urine output. Her incision
is clean, dry, and intact. Her fundus is firm and below the
umbilicus. Her post-operative hematocrit is < >. She plans to use
the mini-pill for birth control. We plan to discharge her when she is
48 hours postpartum.”

                                                                  30
High Risk Patients:
Presentation of high risk patients will vary considerably depending
on the patient. Each patient’s presentation should begin with the
patient’s age, g’s and p’s, gestational age, mechanism for dating
(e.g. LMP and first trimester ultrasound), and why she was
admitted. Important things to include are: if/when betamethasone
was administered, recent EFW/AFI, fetal presentation, prior OB
history, consents obtained, results of cultures (GBS, GC/Chl,
urine, etc.). Otherwise, the presentation will depend on the clinical
situation.

Laboring Patients:
Include: patient’s age, g’s and p’s, gestational age, mechanism for
dating, reason for admission (labor, PROM). Also include fetal
status, most recent cervical exam with the time, progress in labor,
augmentation, presence of epidural, GBS/rubella/Rh status


OB PAPERWORK

Labor and Delivery is almost paperless. Our charting system is
TraceVue, and we do all our orders in CareLink. However, the
various “administrative” tasks are outlined below.

Orders:
Our orders are all done in CareLink

There are order sets available for most clinical scenarios. These
order sets are located by opening CareLink, selecting the patient
who needs orders and clicking on the “clipboard” icon at the top
left of the screen next to the patient’s name. From that screen,

                                                                  31
click on “Order Sets, Adult,” in the left hand column, then “OB-
GYN or Women’s” (this changes periodically). You may then
select the given scenario and select your orders.

Remember that in CareLink, every patient needs to have their
allergies verified before any order may be placed and all orders
need to be submitted before they will be processed.

Typical Admission Orders:
Admit Reason
Patient Condition
Vital Sign frequency
Activity (usually Up Ad Lib or Bedrest with Bathroom Privileges)
Continuous external fetal and uterine monitoring
Diet (clear liquid for laboring patients, NPO for anyone with a high
      likelihood of going to the OR)
Lactated Ringers @ 125 cc/hr
Type and Screen and CBCP
GBS Prophylaxis if needed

Postpartum Orders:
All admit orders must be discontinued in CareLink before entering
postpartum orders.

Typical Postpartum Orders:
Admit Reason
Procedure
Patient Condition
Vital Signs Progression (depends on delivery method)
Activity (usually ambulate as tolerated)
Perineal Care
Foley (if cesarean section or other indication)

                                                                   32
Diet (usually adult regular)
Lactated Ringers @ 125 cc/hr, saline lock when tolerating PO
PRN’s: usually milk of magnesia, Maalox, simethicone,
docusate, diphenhydramine, and lanolin
MMR and RhoGAM if indicated
Pain Medication: acetaminophen, ibuprofen.
If cesarean section: toradol (if clinically acceptable), and a
narcotic
AM lab (if cesarean section): CBCP

Every patient gets a home-care agency (VNA) visit

Other orders can be placed by typing an order in the box that
appears at the top of the screen after clicking on the “clipboard”
icon.

Discharge Prescriptions:
After a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery, patients should
receive these prescriptions:
Ibuprofen 600mg PO Q 6-8 hours PRN pain (usually # 90 with 1
refill)
Colace 100mg PO BID PRN constipation (usually # 60 with 2
refills)
FeSo4 325mg PO BID (usually # 60 with 2 refills) – ONLY IF
CONSIDERABLY ANEMIC

Patients who have had cesarean sections, postpartum tubal
ligations, or a complicated delivery may also get narcotic pain
medications. Options include:
Percocet 5/325mg: 1-2 tabs PO Q4-6hours PRN for pain
Norco 5/325 mg: 1-2 tabs PO Q4-6hours PRN for pain


                                                                  33
The number of tabs administered depends on the situation and by
physician preference, however, in general, cesarean sections
should get at least # 90 with 0 refills, postpartum tubals or
complicated vaginal deliveries may get # 40 with 0 refills.

Patients may also request refills on a prenatal vitamin or
contraception.

Prescriptions are written in CareWeb, printed, and placed in the
front of the patient’s chart at the clerk’s station. They are usually
most conveniently done immediately upon admission. It is very
time-consuming to have to print all the discharge prescriptions for
the postpartum patients you see during rounds before board sign-
out.


DISCHARGE ISSUES

As a general rule, most patients are discharged home 24 hours
after a vaginal delivery and 48 hours after a cesarean section. If a
patient delivers after 8 pm, they may stay the following night if
they choose. Patients who are otherwise ready for discharge but
who have a baby in the NICU may also be candidates for nesting,
if available. The charge nurse determines which patients will
go to which nesting rooms. Never promise a patient a nesting
room as there are elaborate protocols for distributing these limited
rooms. Tell the patient her nurse will help her coordinate this and
she may stay in her room if there are no nesting rooms available.

Discharge instructions:
After any delivery, we recommend pelvic rest for six weeks, which
means no heavy lifting, no sexual intercourse, and no tampons/

                                                                  34
douching or other objects in the vagina. If patients are on a
narcotic pain medication, they should not drive while continuing to
take them as they can cause impaired function. If a patient
underwent a cesarean section, she should not drive for a
minimum of two weeks post-operatively, or until she no longer
requires narcotic pain medication.

On the day of discharge, patients should be counseled that triage
is available for any issues until they are 6 weeks postpartum.
They should contact their doctor or triage with any heavy vaginal,
bleeding, excessive or worsening pain, fevers > 100.5, breast
pain or redness, incisional redness/irritation/opening if applicable,
or with other issues.

Most patients can follow-up with a postpartum visit in 6 weeks,
although if you are concerned about postpartum depression, the
patient had a particularly complicated course, or with other issues,
patients may be seen by their primary OB earlier.

POSTPARTUM CONTRACEPTION
We like to ensure that any patient who would like a prescription
for contraception postpartum has one before she is discharged,
but not every patient has to go home with a definitive plan for birth
control. It is important to remind patients that they may conceive
while breastfeeding if they are not utilizing an alternate form of
contraception. It is also a common misperception that a woman
cannot conceive before she has a period following a delivery and
it is important that patients understand that they could become
pregnant before having a period. In general, if a patient prefers to
not be discharged with a prescription this is ok, as contraception
can be discussed more in-depth at the postpartum visit. If there is
a particularly complicated patient, or someone in whom another

                                                                  35
pregnancy in the near future would be contraindicated, we may be
more aggressive in our discussions about contraception.

It is sometimes helpful to simply ask: “Would you like to discuss
options for birth control when you are discharged?” or “Would you
like any prescriptions for contraception to go home with?”

Common Postpartum Contraceptive Options:
1. Abstinence
2. Condoms
3. Micronor (a progesterone-only pill, AKA the “mini-pill”) - Safe
for women who are breast-feeding (should not reduce milk
supply). Patients should start taking the pill two weeks after
delivery. The most important thing to discuss is that it has to be
taken at the *same time* every day (i.e., within the same hour).
4. Combination OCPs/OrthoEvra Patch/NuvaRing - A relative
contraindication in early breast feeding (may decrease milk
supply). If patient is not breastfeeding or decides this is her best
option, she should wait until at least 4 weeks, preferably 6 weeks,
after delivery to start it due to the potentially increased risk of
blood clots.
5. Depo Provera - an IM progesterone shot every 3 months –
Patient may receive prior to discharge. Average weight gain is 10
lbs.
5. IUDs – Either Mirena IUD or ParaGard - Can be placed at the
postpartum visit, and are the most effective form of contraception
we have to offer (even more effective than tubal ligation, with the
additional benefit that they are not permanent, in case the patient
changes her mind).
7. Implanon - a subcutaneously inserted progesterone-only
implant that is good for 3 years. This should not affect milk supply


                                                                 36
and can be placed at a postpartum visit or potentially prior to
discharge if indicated.
8. Permanent sterilization (bilateral tubal ligation, Essure
procedure)
9. Vasectomy
10. Natural family planning” or “rhythm method”- we don’t usually
bring this method up, as it has a very high typical use failure rate
(up to 25%). If the patient mentions it, they should be informed
about the potential failure rate, as well as told that in order to use
the method, they need very regular and predictable periods
(which is not always the case right after delivery/breastfeeding).

BREASTFEEDING BASICS

Breastfeeding is considered the optimal form of nutrition for a
neonate according to pediatricians. There are many neonatal
benefits. Breast milk provides an excellent source of nutrition and
maternal antibodies that cannot be duplicated by formula.
Breastfed children have a lower incidence of asthma and
allergies, and fewer childhood illnesses in general.

There are also many maternal benefits to breastfeeding. It
stimulates oxytocin release, which increases uterine contractions
and decreases postpartum bleeding. Hormones released during
lactation are also believed to contribute to feeling of relaxation
and attachment. Furthermore, breastfeeding is associated with a
decreased risk of breast cancer. The incidence of pregnancy
induced long-term obesity is also reduced.

Women who may have difficulty with breastfeeding include
younger moms (<18), those with poor nutrition status, women with
flat nipples, those with hypoplastic or tubular breasts, and women

                                                                    37
who have had breast surgery in which complete severing of the
lactiferous ducts has occurred. Women who should not
breastfeed are those who take street drugs or are alcohol
abusers, have infant with galactosemia, have HIV (in developed
countries), have active/untreated TB, take certain medications
(bromocriptine, cocaine, cyclosporin, doxorubicin, ergotamine,
lithium, methotrexate, radioactive iodine or other radio-labeled
elements), are being treated for breast or certain other cancers,
and have certain infections (e.g., varicella). Hepatitis B , hepatitis
C, and chronic CMV (in an immunocompetent mother) do not
preclude breastfeeding.
Colostrum is the fluid secreted immediately following delivery. It
usually comes in within the first 24 hours. It has a high level of
IgA and other proteins. During the 4-7 days following delivery,
protein and mineral concentration decrease and water, fat and
lactose increase. Women need an additional 500kcal per day
while breastfeeding and should maintain a calcium intake of
1000mg per day.

Feeding problems are common in preterm infants and in babies
born with anomalies.


TRIAGE

Triage is essentially an ER for pregnant women. Pregnant women
with any issue may be seen in triage. Any acutely life-threatening
issue or clearly non-pregnancy related issue that requires
immediate attention (e.g. shortness of breath, chest pain, trauma,
broken bones, etc.) will be evaluated first in the ED, then sent to
triage for evaluation of any pregnancy-related issues.


                                                                    38
Certified Nurse Midwives staff triage 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. The midwife will notify the chief-resident of any UMOG
patients. The midwife may ask the residents to evaluate a patient
for any number of reasons. Typically, the midwife will call the chief
resident; however, the chief may ask the junior to see a patient if
and when it is appropriate and especially when it poses a
valuable learning opportunity. Students may be assigned to
triage for two-week blocks. They should plan to work closely with
the midwives.

Conditions frequently seen in triage include rupture of
membranes, labor, vaginal bleeding, decreased fetal movement,
premature labor, pyelonephritis, gastroenteritis, preeclampsia,
first trimester bleeding and hyperemesis gravidarum.


SELECTED TOPICS:

CHORIOAMNIONITIS

Criteria: Temperature of ≥ 38 degrees Celsius, no other obvious
source of fever, AND one or more of the following signs or
symptoms:
-maternal baseline heart rate > 110 beats per minute (lasting at
least 10 minutes)
-uterine tenderness
-foul smelling amniotic fluid
-fetal baseline heart rate of > 160 beats per minute (lasting at
least 10 minutes)
-fever of > 38.4 degrees Celsius



                                                                  39
If the patient has an isolated elevated temperature of ≥ 38.0 but ≤
38.4 degrees Celsius, without any of the above listed signs or
symptoms, then the diagnostic criteria are not met and antibiotics
do not need to be initiated. In this scenario, a 36-hour postpartum
neonatal observation period is not indicated.

When diagnostic criteria for chorioamnionitis are met, the
attending should be notified and antibiotic treatment initiated.
First-line treatment is with Ampicillin and Gentamicin. Treat with
Ampicillin 2gm IV q 6 hours (NOTE: this means increasing the
dose for patients previously receiving amp for GBS prophylaxis)
and Gentamicin 5mg/kg IV q24 hours. If the patient is allergic to
penicillins, you may treat with Clindamicin 900mg IV q 8 hours
with Gentamicin at the above dose.

If the patient delivers vaginally, discontinue antibiotics after
delivery. If the patient delivers by cesarean section, treat with
prophylactic endometritis antibiotics (Gentamicin/Clindamycin as
dosed above) for 24 hours after surgery. If a patient has a fever
after delivery (NSVD or C/S), you should treat for endometritis
(see below).

ENDOMETRITIS

Defined as a post-partum temperature greater then 38.0,
persistently elevated temperature, uterine tenderness, or an
elevated white count. Treat with Clindamycin 900 mg IV q 8
hours and Gentamicin 5mg/kg IV q 24hrs until 24 hours afebrile if
the patient had a vaginal delivery, and 48 hours afebrile if the
patient had a Cesarean delivery. If a patient continues to be
febrile after receiving 24-48 hours of antibiotics, consider adding
Ampicillin (2g IV q6h) to cover enterococcus and clinda-resistant

                                                                 40
GBS (not covered by Clindamycin/Gentamicin) and switching to
metronidazole (500mg IV q8h) from clinda for better anaerobic
coverage. Penicillin allergic patients may be treated with
Cephalosporins or Vancomycin if needed. Other causes of
postpartum fever include wound infection, mastitis, septic pelvic
thrombophlebitis, and non-obstetrical causes (e.g. URI, UTI,
pyelonephritis, etc).


PPROM PROTOCOL

Erythromycin 250 mg IV q6 hr x 2 days, then 250 mg PO TID x 5
days
Ampicillin 2g IV q6 hr x 2 days, then Amoxicillin 250 mg PO TID x
5 days
Total treatment time is seven days to increase the latency from
PPROM to labor

POSTPARTUM HEMORRHAGE

If you get called regarding a patient with postpartum bleeding, this
is a potential obstetrical emergency – the patient must be
assessed immediately. Consider: uterine atony (assess for
uterine tone, check for and evacuate any clots in the lower uterine
segment which may prevent the uterus from clamping down),
undiagnosed or unrepaired lacerations (especially cervical
lacerations which may be very difficult to visualize in an
uncomfortable postpartum patient); retained products of
conception; a full bladder preventing the uterus from clamping
down.



                                                                 41
Risk factors for uterine atony include: multiple gestation, rapid
delivery, very prolonged labor, polyhydramnios, prolonged use of
pitocin, chorioamnionitis, and general anesthesia.

Treatments for postpartum hemorrhage include:
Draining the bladder (this can really help)
Uterine massage/evacuating uterus of clots
Pitocin 20-30U in 1L NS or LR
Cytotec 800 mcg rectally
Methergine 0.2mg IM. Contraindications: hypertension,
preeclampsia, eclampsia.
Hemabate 0.25mg IM. Contraindications: asthma.
D&C
Bakri Balloon
O’Leary uterine artery ligation
B-Lynch suture
Uterine artery embolization
Hysterectomy




                                                               42
Basic Prenatal Care
Initial Visit:
Labs: T&S, CBCP, RPR, HepBsAg, Rubella
Offer mv testing
Pap, if no pap in the last 2 years, see ACOG pap guidelines
GC and Chlamydia if age < 26 yr, or history of STD's
Urine culture
Off genetics screening (CF, Hgb electroph, Tay-Sachs,
Canavans, AFD)
Depression Screen
11-14 weeks:
Offer First Trimester screening or
Offer CVS testing
15-20 weeks:
Offer second trimester screening if first trimester screening was
not done, or
Offer amniocentesis
18-20 weeks:
Fetal Survey
24-28 weeks:
CBCP
1 hour Glucola
Antibody screen ifRH negative
RhoGAM ifRh neg and ABS is negative @28 weeks
26-30 weeks:
Depression Screen
36 weeks:
GBS screening
(Not needed if patient has GBS-bacteriuria)
41 weeks:
Recommend induction of labor
If expectant management; twice weekly NST/AFI

                                                                    43
Prenatal Care for Patients with BMI>40

Add to routine prenatal labs:
Liver panel
Renal panel
PR/Cr ration
TSH
HgbA1C
25 Hydro Vitamin D
B12, for patients who had bariatric surgery
Nutrition counseling, please check whether insurance will cover
EKG and maternal cardiac ECHO
First trimester ultrasound to assess gestational age
Glucola at 12 weeks, repeat at 24 weeks
Transvaginal survey at 14 15 weeks
Fetal survey at 20 weeks
Ultrasound for fetal growth at 26 and 32 weeks
Anesthesia consult Weekly NST/AFI starting at 36 weeks
Delivery recommendations:
If no co morbidities present, await spontaneous labor
If co morbidities present, consider induction at 39 weeks




                                                              44
45
DIABETICS IN LABOR

Insulin-requiring diabetics (IR-GDM, type I or Type 2) will need
both insulin and D5LR in labor to prevent hyperglycemia in mom
and hypoglycemia in the newborn. (see Appendix 5 for insulin
drip protocol in labor). A recent EFW should be available in a
term pregnancy to assess for macrosomia. If a patient has
diabetes in pregnancy and an EFW > 4500 g, a primary elective
cesarean section may be considered.

INSULIN DRIP (GTT) PROTOCOL

Run D5LR at 125cc/hr
Place 50 units of regular insulin in a glass bottle containing 500cc
of normal saline
Check the blood sugar every 2 hours in early labor and every
hour once in active labor.

You should run the insulin drip as follows if a Pregestational Type
I Diabetic (insulin DEPENDENT):

      Blood Sugar                 GTT
      <100                        0.5 U/hr
      101 – 140                   1.0 U/hr
      141 – 180                   1.5 U/hr
      181 – 220                   2.0 u/hr
      >221                        2.5U/hr

You should run the insulin drip as follows is a Pregestational Type
II, or Insulin-Requiring Gestational Diabetic (IRGDM):
         Blood Sugar               GTT
                                                                 46
      <110                        0.0 U/hr
      110 – 140                   1.0 U/hr
      141 – 180                   1.5 U/hr
      181 – 220                   2.0 u/hr
      >221                        2.5U/hr


GROUP B STREPTOCOCCUS PROTOCOL

Indications for GBS prophylaxis:
A patient with a positive GBS vaginal/perianal culture at 35-37
weeks in this pregnancy.
A patient with a GBS positive urine culture this pregnancy
(anytime during the pregnancy)
A patient with a history of a GBS-affected infant in a previous
pregnancy
GBS status unknown within 5 weeks of delivery, and: <37 wks
GA (unless delivered by cesarean section with intact membranes
and no labor) or prolonged ROM (>18 hours), or Maternal
temperature >100.4 F (38.0° C) – use ampicillin and gentamicin if
chorioamnionitis suspected as cause of fever

Antibiotic choices:
First line: Ampicillin 2 grams IV load then 1 gram IV q 4 hours until
delivery.
If PCN allergic with low-risk for anaphylaxis allergy: cefazolin 2
grams IV x 1, then 1 gram IV q 8 hrs until delivery.
If PCN allergic and high-risk for anaphlaxis (previous anaphylaxis,
urticaria, PCN allergy + h/o asthma): Clindamycin–sensitive GBS:
Clindamycin 900mg IV q 8 hours until delivery Clindamycin–
resistant GBS: Vancomycin 1 g IV q. 12 hours until delivery.

                                                                  47
Antenatal Testing Guidelines




                               48
OB ACRONYMS

AFI:              Amniotic fluid index
BPP:              Biophysical Profile
BTL*:             Bilateral tubal ligation
BV:               Bacterial vaginosis
DCGDM*:           Diet Controlled Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
EDC*:             Estimated date of confinement (i.e. due date)
EFM*:             Electronic fetal monitoring
FAVD*:            Forceps assisted vaginal delivery
FHT(s)*:          Fetal heart tones or fetal heart tracing
FSE:              Fetal scalp electrode
GBS:              Group B Streptococcus
GTT:              Glucose tolerance test
IUPC:             Intrauterine Pressure catheter
IRGDM:            Insulin Requiring Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus
LOF*:            Leakage of fluid
LTCS*:           Low transverse cesarean section
MFM:             Maternal Fetal Medicine
MVA:             Motor Vehicle Accident OR
                 Manual vacuum aspiration
OCPs:            Oral contraceptive pills
NSVD:            Normal spontaneous vaginal delivery
NST:             Non-stress test
PLTCS*:          Primary low transverse cesarean section
POL*:            Premature Onset of Labor
PPD*:            Postpartum day
PPROM:           Preterm, premature rupture of membranes
(pronounced P-PROM)
PPTL*:           Postpartum tubal ligation

                                                            49
Pre-E*:            Preeclampsia
PTL*:              Preterm labor
RLTCS*             Repeat low transverse cesarean section
SOL*:              Spontaneous onset of labor
SROM:              Spontaneous rupture of membranes
SVE:               Sterile vaginal exam
TOL*:              Trial Of Labor (After Cesarean Section)
TVCL:              Trans-vaginal Cervical Length
VAVD*:             Vacuum assisted vaginal delivery
VBAC:              Vaginal Birth After Cesarean section


RADIATION EXPOSURE IN PREGNANCY

According to ACOG guidelines, radiation exposure up to 5 rads
has NOT been associated with increases in fetal anomalies or
pregnancy loss.

      Study                    Radiation exposure
      CXR (2views)             0.02-0.07 mrad
      Abd XR (1 view)          100 mrad
      IVP                      <1 rad
      Hip film (1view)         200 mrad
      Mammogram                7-20 mrad
      Barium                   2-4 rads
      enema/SBseries
      CT Head/Chest            <1 rad
      CT Abd/Spine             3.5 rad
      CT pelvimetry            250 mrad
      USN/MRI                  NONE

* 2005 ACOG Compendium of Selected Publications
                                                                50
SUMMARY/WAYS TO HAVE A GREAT EXPERIENCE

If you have a question, ask for advice. The chief, attendings,
residents and nurses are all available and very happy to help. We
work as a team, and no one should ever feel alone.

Any call or page about bleeding (in triage, post-partum or
antepartum patients) takes precedence over all else going on at
the moment. Other potential emergent situations include pages
for bradycardia, and if you get any page for help for a potential
shoulder dystocia, run to that room. Of course, if you are in the
midst of something else that is critical, call for help. Make sure
you mobilize help (attendings, chief resident, anesthesia, the OR)
as soon as possible.

If you are feeling overwhelmed, get help. Call your chief and let
her/him know what is on your plate. Her or she can help you to
prioritize and should help to shoulder the work-load when things
get very busy. Remember, you are not alone. If your chief is
busy, call the attending.




                                                                51
GYNECOLOGY

The goals of the gynecology portion of your rotation are for you to
become familiar with common (and sometimes some uncommon)
gynecologic complaints, understand the pathology associated
with those complaints, be exposed to common gynecologic
procedures, and learn about the management of gynecologic
problems.

To accomplish the goals of your rotation, you will be assigned by
the Clerkship Director to various clinics, including specialist and
generalist clinics (both attending clinics and resident clinics), and
spend time on one or more of the inpatient teams described
below.

GENERAL INFORMATION

Logistics
There are five inpatient gynecology services, each covered by
different residents. These services are briefly described below.

Benign Gynecology Team
The benign gynecology team is typically covered by one fourth-
year, one third-year, one second-year, and one first-year resident.
The benign team takes care of the inpatient benign gynecology
patients (both surgical and nonsurgical admits), covers OR cases,
and sees inpatient and ER consults. Residents are also
responsible for attending a number of clinics. Each day is a little
different depending on the OR schedule, clinic schedules, and the
number of consults requested. Students should prioritize OR
cases first, then clinics, then seeing ER or inpatient consults,


                                                                   52
unless something particularly unique or interesting is occurring in
the ER or elsewhere.

Urogynecology Team
The urogynecology service is always covered by one fellow and is
often, but not always covered by a separate third or fourth year
resident. There may also be an intern on the team. These patients
are cared for by Drs. Mitch Berger, John DeLancey, Dee Fenner,
Megan Shimpf and Dan Morgan. You may be assigned to the
urogynecology service, or you may simply cover some
urogynecology cases while on the benign gynecology service.
Your roles while on urogynecology are the same as your roles on
the benign gynecology service. You can ask any member of the
benign service for help if you are uncertain about what to do.
There is also always a fellow covering the urogynecology service
who you can ask for direction. Each week there is an Educational
Conference from 1-3 pm in room L4053. One hour is dedicated to
the next week’s pre-operative review. You will be expected to
present a patient each week using the UROGYN-TEMPLATE.
The fellow will assign the case the week before you present. In
addition, you will be given a schedule for the following week that
will inform you of your clinic and OR responsibilities. You are
expected to read about the patients before coming to the OR or
clinic. You should select three clinic patients per half day session
and read about them before coming to clinic. You are expected to
work with attending in developing a treatment plan for those
patients. The students will meet with an attending every
Wednesday from 3:00-3:30 for a Urogyn Review.

MIS (Minimally Invasive Surgery) Team
The MIS service is always covered by one fellow and is often, but
not always covered by a separate third or fourth year resident.

                                                                 53
These patients are cared for by Drs. Suzie As-Sani and Bethany
Skinner. You may be assigned to the MIS service, or you may
simply cover some MIS cases while on the benign gynecology
service. Your roles while on MIS are the same as your roles on
the benign gynecology service. You can ask any member of the
benign service for help if you are uncertain about what to do.
There is also always a fellow covering the MIS service who you
can ask for direction.

Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility Team
The REI service is always covered by one fellow and often by one
resident (of various levels). There is not always a resident on REI.
REI attendings are Drs. John Randolph, Yolanda Smith, Gregory
Chrisman, and Senait Fisseha. Much of the REI service is based
in outpatient clinics; however, you may cover REI cases while on
the benign gynecology service. Otherwise, you may be assigned
to clinics. You can ask any member of the benign gynecology
service for help with REI patients. There is also always a fellow
covering the REI service who you can ask for direction.

Gynecological Oncology Team
The oncology service is labeled as GYO in CareWeb. This service
is always covered by one fellow, one third-year resident (the
chief), one second-year resident, and one first-year resident.
There is a rotating pager which will help you get in touch with the
GYN-onc team: # 33189. Our gynecologic oncology attendings
are Drs. R. Kevin Reynolds, J. Rebecca Liu, Carolyn Johnston,
and Karen Mclean. The Onc team is entirely separate from the
benign services. You will cover gynecologic oncology clinics and
OR cases depending on the day. The gynecologic oncology
senior resident will give you more information about what to do
and where to go; however, briefly, Mondays are typically spent in

                                                                 54
Dr. Johnston’s clinic, Tuesdays and Wednesdays are in the OR,
and Dr. Mclean has clinic on Tuesday afternoon. Thursdays are
either in Dr. Liu’s clinic or in the OR, and Fridays are in Dr.
Reynolds’ clinic. Remember, you can page # 33189 with
questions or to identify the onc team at any given time.

STUDENT EXPECTATIONS

When you are assigned to your continuity clinic, being in clinic is
your priority. If you have an off-site clinic in the AM, you may or
may not come in to round before clinic, but discuss this with your
chief.

In general, the team will tell you where to go and what to do.
Although most days you will wear scrubs, if you are uncertain, it is
always best to err on the side of wearing “professional” attire and
changing into scrubs if you will be in the OR.

You can get in touch with a member of the gynecology team 24/7
by paging 0005. This pager is rotated amongst the residents and
will always be held by an in-house gynecology resident.

For students, lectures and assigned continuity clinics take
priority over the OR. You should then try to cover all OR cases,
with extra students attending general or specialty clinics, seeing
patients in the ER, reading, or taking part in small-group teaching
organized by the residents. Check with your team to determine
what to do each day.

Rounds
After the residents get sign-out from the night team, every day
starts with rounds. Morning rounds for each of the gynecology

                                                                  55
services are teaching and working rounds every day. In order to
give you the opportunity to be more involved in caring for your
patients, you will be asked to pre-round on certain patients. The
team will then round together and see each patient. There is
sometimes an attending who rounds with the teams and
sometimes it is just residents. It is a bit unpredictable when to
expect an attending and your team will be able to tell you what to
expect.

The timing of morning rounds varies each day according to the
number of patients and when the day starts. The senior resident
or fellow will decide the prior afternoon what time the team will
round. You should try to find out what time rounds will occur
before going home for the day, but if it’s a weekend or holiday or
you just didn’t hear, you can page 0005 (with a call back number)
and they can either point you in the right direction or tell you what
time rounds will occur. You should always know what time rounds
will occur before 8:00 pm (i.e. don’t page the chief at 10:00 pm to
find out what time rounds will be in the morning – he or she will
probably be asleep.).

Each team also rounds sometime in the afternoon, but this is
much less formal and often includes only certain members of the
team (i.e. those not in the OR or clinic). You will not be expected
to pre-round for afternoon rounds and we do not typically write
notes in the afternoon.

ORs
The OR schedule can be found by going to the clinical home
page, “connect to other systems,” “OR schedule.” You may
contact the administrator at: CAS-Help@med.umich.edu to
request a login. This can be very helpful to do in advance. You

                                                                  56
can also look in CareWeb under the attendings for your service to
determine the OR schedule for the day. Your residents will help
you, however, the students on a team should divide the OR cases
evenly to optimize exposure to various cases. It is very difficult
for the residents to keep track of what cases each medical
student has seen, and they may ask you to divide yourselves
fairly.

Prior to a case, students should look up the patient on
CareWeb. The more you know about the patient and the case,
the more you will get out of being in the OR and the more
opportunities you will have to participate. Reading a little about
the clinical scenario, the procedure, and especially the anatomy is
highly recommended. We meet patients in the pre-op holding
area. You should introduce yourself to any patient whose
procedure you will observe. Patients who are being admitted
postop need an op note and postop orders (described below).
Outpatient surgery has more associated paperwork, including an
op note, postop orders, prescriptions, and postop instructions.
You should help with as much of this as you feel comfortable.

Students are encouraged to scrub in on as many cases as
possible. Exceptions include some minor cases and cases where
there may be three surgeons and a scrub nurse involved. For
many operative laparoscopic procedures, limited room around the
table means that students can see better unscrubbed. Check
with the attending and/or resident if in doubt. Where time allows,
students may help to close rectus fascia and subcuticular skin
closures at the discretion of the surgical team.

Before entering the OR, be sure you have the following:
 Scrubs

                                                                57
    Hair-cover
    Mask
    Shoe Covers

Before Scrubbing-In, be sure you have done the following:
 Checked with the attendings/residents that it’s time to scrub
 Pulled your gloves for the scrub nurse
 Removed any watches/rings/bracelets, etc from your hands
     and wrists
 Covered your eyes with goggles or a mask with built-in face
     shield

Consults
Members of the benign gynecology team respond to inpatient or
ED consults that come in during the day. The consulting resident
obtains an H&P and students can participate by doing an H&P in
advance and presenting the patient to the residents. Consults
give you a great opportunity to perform H&Ps, physical exams,
and to review imaging studies with the residents and occasionally,
a radiologist.

PAPERWORK

The GYN side is essentially paperless; however, there are a
number of administrative type tasks described below.

PRE-OP RESIDENT AND STUDENT FORM
NAME
REG NUMBER
DAGE OF SURGERY
ROOM
ATTENDING

                                                               58
PROCEDURE
HPI:
SA:     SUI:        DD:         BB: N
Height: Weight: 142 BMI: BP:
POP-Q:
Aa | Ba | C
GH | PB | TVL
Ap | Bp | D
Demonstrable SUI: (Method)
PVR: UA: neg
OTHER TESTS:
PMH:
PSH:
Meds:
Allergies:
 PREOP ISSUES:
( ) H&P ( ) Consent
( ) Labs:
PREOP ORDERS:
(x) EKG:
(x) CXR
(x) DVT
(x) Abx:
(x) Bowel prep:
() Clearance: anesthesia cleared
 ISSUES:
INDICATION FOR SURGERY:
WHY PARTICULAR PROCEDURE CHOSEN:
SUCCESS/RISKS OF PROCEDURE:
REFERENCES:



                                        59
Admit H&P’s
Patients having scheduled OR cases have the H&P done at their
pre-op visit, which is usually dictated on CareWeb.

For ER and clinic admits, the resident will complete the H&P, but
if it will be a learning opportunity, the student may be asked to
start it.

Even as we move toward fully electronic medical records,
students should take every opportunity to hone their history-taking
skills in clinic and in the ER. The residents may ask you to type
an H&P and email it to them. When you write these, do your best
to commit yourself to a plan.

GYN History and Physical:
Chief Complaint: A one-line summary of the patient’s problem.
(e.g. 32 year old g3p3 with menorrhagia and symptomatic
anemia)

HPI: Gyn patients usually have symptoms such as heavy or
irregular menses, pelvic pain, infertility, discharge, dyspareunia,
postmenopausal bleeding, etc. The HPI follows the conventional
format of onset, nature, duration, location of symptoms,
exacerbating and relieving factors, associated symptoms,
treatments and their effectiveness, etc. In chronic disease, such
as chronic pelvic pain, try to assess the impact on the patient’s
life, including work, emotions and relationships.

Review of systems: As a minimum, ask relevant direct questions
such as urinary or bowel symptoms.



                                                                 60
Past Gyn History: Ask about menses – menarche, cycle duration,
length, heaviness, intermenstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, and
menopause (if relevant). If heavy menses, ask about passage of
clots, and attempt to quantify pad or tampon use. Enquire about
abnormal Pap tests including date of last Pap, other sexually
transmitted infections such as chlamydia/gonorrhea, PID, herpes,
genital warts, and other Gyn problems such as fibroids. The
extent of the sexual history needed varies depending on the
presenting problem, but as a minimum should include whether the
patient is currently sexually active, and for women of reproductive
age what kind of birth control method they are using, if any, and
how reliably they are using it. For postmenopausal women, ask
about hypoestrogenic symptoms such as hot flashes or night
sweats, vaginal dryness, and about current and past use of
hormone/estrogen replacement therapy.

Past OB History: For each pregnancy beyond the first trimester,
ask about the date of delivery, gestational age, type of delivery,
sex, birthweight, and any complications. Ask specifically about
other pregnancies, including spontaneous abortions, elective
interruptions of pregnancy, ectopics, etc. For ectopic
pregnancies, try to determine whether they were ruptured or
unruptured, medically or surgically treated, and whether the tube
was conserved or removed if laparoscopy or laparotomy was
performed.

Past Medical History / Past Surgical History: Ask about any
chronic/ongoing medical problems including, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, neurologic problems,
GI issues, etc.



                                                                61
Health Maintenance: Ask about mammograms, colonoscopies,
bone scans, etc.

Drugs / Allergies

Family History: Especially cervical, endometrial, ovarian, breast
and colon cancers.

Social History: Relationship status, work, tobacco / alcohol / drug
use.

Physical Exam: Start with vitals (BP, pulse, temp, respiratory
rate, O2 sat). Look for other general signs, eg hirsuitism, acne, or
virilization as directed by the history. Examine thyroid, lymph
nodes, heart, lungs, breasts, abdomen, extremities. Look for
surgical scars on the abdomen, evidence of distension or ascites,
and palpate for masses, organomegaly, or herniation. Inspect the
vulva, urethra, and perineum. Speculum exam as needed.
Vaginal exam and bimanual palpation of the cervix, uterus, and
adnexa. Rectovaginal examination is performed for most patients
with known or suspected Gyn malignancies, as well as for
endometriosis, pelvic pain, or adnexal masses. Stool hemoccult
for Oncology patients.

Assessment: A one or two sentence summary of the patient, eg
“65-year-old G4 P4 with a one-year history of postmenopausal
bleeding, and a past medical history significant for Stage 1 breast
carcinoma. She has been taking tamoxifen for the last 3 years”.

Plan: Commit to your best plan. This is the area of your H&P that
truly shows your knowledge. Think in systems (neuro,
cardiovascular, respiratory, GU, GI, musculoskeletal, ID,

                                                                 62
hematologic, etc.). When able, try to include some literature to
back up your plan.


Progress Notes
These are written before morning rounds, and later on in the day
only if significant events occur. We utilize the CareWeb “signout”
function to generate notes each AM. Your team can show you
how to do this if it’s new to you. In general, your note should
follow a SOAP format and include the following:

S: Does the patient have good pain control? Any nausea or
vomiting? Is she tolerating clears or regular diet as appropriate;
does the patient feel thirsty/hungry? Any flatus? Any difficulty
voiding? Any other problems?

O: Vitals – include T current and T max with time. For postop
patients, write I/O over last 8 hr shift as well as over the previous
24 hrs. Physical exam – general, cardiovascular, respiratory,
abdomen including tenderness, distension, bowel sounds and
state of incision (?erythema, serous or purulent discharge).
Extremities, including calf tenderness & presence of SCDs.

A: eg. 44 yo P3 POD #1 s/p VH for complex endometrial
hyperplasia, doing well

P: Number if you like – 1. D/C Foley and ambulate. 2. clear
liquids as tolerated. 3. check CBCp, basic. For complex patients
with significant comorbidity, and all ICU patients, divide your plan
into systems such as FEN, Heme, CVS, RS, Renal, Endo, Pain,
Dispo.


                                                                     63
Short OR Note Template:
Pre-op Dx: e.g. symptomatic uterine fibroids/abnormal uterine
bleeding/adnexal mass, etc.
Postop Dx:
Procedure:
Surgeon: Attending
Residents:
Students:
Anesthesia: GET/LMA/spinal/sedation/local, etc
Complications: none
EBL:
UO:
Fluids:
Findings: EUA and operative - generally, leave more than one
line for this section
Specimens: all specimens sent to pathology (don’t forget things
like pelvic washings)
Drains: e.g JP (location of JP drain), Foley
Dispo: PACU, extubated, in stable condition

Post-Op Check: Basically a SOAP note as above, paying extra
attention to pain control, nausea, vitals (hypotension, tachycardia,
and/or low urine output are red flags), and physical exam.
Include a calculation of total ins and outs.

Admit Orders:
Orders vary a little from case to case, but the following are fairly
general. A mnemonic to remember the orders is “ADC VAN
DISMAL.”
Admit: To 8B
Service: GY2 (GY1 for REI or GYO for Gyn Onc)


                                                                   64
Diagnosis: either s/p (name of operation) or reason for surgery
such as symptomatic fibroids
Condition: fair (guarded for ICU admits)
Vitals: q. 1’ x 1, q 2’ x 2, q 4’ x 4, q shift
Activity: dangle legs tonight, OOB on day #1
Nursing: Foley to DD (dependent drainage), strict I/O’s q 4’

DVT Prophy: SCDs at all times when not ambulating OR Heparin
5000U SQ BID-TID
Incentive Spirometer: to bedside, use 10/hr while awake
Notify MD: T >100.4 (38 C), BP >160/90 < 90/50 P > 110 < 60,
U.O. < 120 cc/4 hrs
Diet: sips and chips for abdominal surgery, clear liquids as
tolerated for vaginal surgery and laparoscopy
IV: typically D5 1/2 NS + 20 mEq KCl at 125 cc/hr, calculate
maintenance fluids by weight for patients with major comorbidity
eg. CHF
Special: eg. strip J-P drain q shift
Meds: Pain meds, typically PCA per Anesthesiology, APS to
follow. Unless contraindicated, add toradol 30 mg IVPB q 6’ ATC
x 4 doses (15 mg for older patients, eg. over 65).
Prophylactic orders – anzemet 12.5-25 mg IV q 6 hrs PRN,
benadryl 25-50 mg iv/po q 6’ PRN
Home Meds: Continue patient’s typical home-meds, although
typically hold ACE-inhibitors, NSAIDs, some BP meds in the
immediate post-operative period
Labs:       Typically a CBCP next am, add basic if on
diuretics/excessive EBL/chronic disease, etc.




                                                                  65
 Calculating Total OR “Ins and Outs” (I/O)
 To determine total “outs” intraoperatively, add:
 EBL x 3 (because of increased oncotic pressure of blood) + UOP
 + hrs open x 1000 (e.g. total insensible losses are 1000cc/hr
 open) + ascites

 To determine total “ins” intraoperatively, add:
 IVF + blood transfusions (# units x 350 cc/unit x 3)
 Hespan, albumin and other colloid fluids do not use a multiplier

  Some like the following table:
                OR                              PACU       Floor
EBL             EBL x 3 =                       --         --
UOP
Open Time       # of hrs (1L/hr)                --         --
IVF
Other Ins       e.g. PRBCs # units x 350 x 3    --         --


 Discharge summaries and prescriptions: You can help the team
 quite a bit by working on the Discharge Navigator. This will
 ultimately be the DC Summary for this patient. You may add
 information about the patient’s history, medical course and
 anything else you feel comfortable with.

 Discharge Prescriptions
 Varies greatly depending on the reason for admission, surgery
 etc.
 Most surgical patients get discharged with:
 Norco 5/325, 1 - 2 tabs po q 4-6’ PRN #60 with 0 refills
 Ibuprofen 600 mg po q 6’ PRN #60 with 1-2 refills
 Colace 100 mg po bid #60 with 1-2 refills
                                                                    66
INPATIENT PRESENTATIONS

Individual presentation styles vary. This is a guideline for an initial
full presentation on the first postop day.

“Ms ___ is a 41-year-old, gravida 3 para 2, who is postop day #1
status post total abdominal hysterectomy/bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy for chronic pelvic pain. Her past medical history is
non-significant. Her past surgical history is significant for three
laparoscopies for pelvic pain with lysis of adhesions and ablation
of endometriosis. Intraoperatively she was found to have stage IV
endometriosis and extensive adhesions. EBL was 300 cc.
Subjectively, she is doing well with her morphine PCA for pain
control, had mild nausea last night, but feels thirsty this morning.
Objectively, her vitals are ___, she is alert and oriented. Heart
and lungs are clear. Her abdomen is soft, appropriately tender,
and non-distended, with normoactive bowel sounds. Her incision
is clean, dry, and intact with steristrips in place. Her calves are
non-tender and she is wearing SCDs. In summary she is doing
well. The plan is to D/C her Foley, start clear liquids as tolerated,
and check a CBC today”.

On subsequent days assume we already know the patient, so you
can skip the past history and intraoperative findings. You can also
present only pertinent positives and negatives in the physical
exam for speed.




                                                                    67
SELECTED GYN TEACHING OUTLINES:
These are intended as frameworks for discussing some common
Gyn topics when the opportunity presents itself.

Ectopic pregnancy
Epidemiology (rates)
Risk factors
Anatomy, i.e. common locations
Diagnostic tests – beta-HCG, ultrasound
Differential diagnosis
                     Presentation / exam findings
                     Fluids / resuscitation
Medical treatment – indications and contraindications
Surgical options – laparoscopy, laparotomy, D&C
                     Recurrence rate and implications for future
fertility
Spontaneous abortion
                     Incidence
                     Types – threatened, inevitable, incomplete,
                                complete, missed
                     Diagnostic tests – ultrasound, beta-HCG
                     Differential diagnosis
                     Presentation / exam findings
                     Use of anti-D immunoglobulin
                     Expectant management
                     Surgical options – manual vacuum aspiration,
                                D&C
                     Complications / septic abortion
                     Recurrent pregnancy loss – diagnosis,
treatment, prognosis


                                                              68
PID
Epidemiology
Risk factors
Organisms
Diagnostic criteria – how accurate are they?
Differential diagnosis
Presentation / exam findings
Medical treatment - outpatient and inpatient
Reasons for hospitalization
Surgical treatment
Complications and implications for future fertility


Uterine fibroids
Epidemiology
Risk factors
Pathology
Location – submucosal, intramural, subserosal
Diagnostic tests
Differential diagnosis
                     Clinical presentation / exam findings
                     Medical treatments
                     Uterine artery embolization
Surgical options – abdominal myomectomy vs. hysterectomy
                     Hysteroscopic and laparoscopic
myomectomy
                     Implications for fertility




                                                             69
Hysteroscopy/D&C

Diagnostic vs. operative
Office alternatives – endometrial biopsy, H/S, SHG
Dilators
Distension fluids vs. CO2
Perforation / complications
Asherman’s syndrome

Tubal ligation
Social considerations
Alternatives – vasectomy, Mirena, copper IUD, Depo-Provera
Anatomy
Methods
Failure rate
                       Risks / complications
Reversibility, risk factors for requesting reversal

Hysterectomy
Indications
Alternatives, i.e. UA embolization, endometrial ablation
Route – abdominal, vaginal, laparoscopic
Supracervical or total, oophorectomy decision-making
Anatomy – uterus, ovaries, tubes, round ligaments
Supporting ligaments
Blood supply to the uterus / ovaries
                      Relations of the ureter
                      Sites of ureteral injury
Risks / complications
                      Post-op care



                                                             70
      Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital

Obstetrics and Gynecology Survival Guide




                                           71
    Saint Joseph Mercy Ob/Gyn Clerkship Survival Guide



Welcome to Ob/Gyn at St. Joseph Mercy! This student-to-student

guide is meant to provide you with some essential information

about the Ob-Gyn clerkship so that you can hit the ground

running. Have fun!

General Information

Schedule:

Your time will be divided as follows:

            Ambulatory: 7-8 days

            Gyn: 4-5 days

            Onc: 2-3 days

            Ob (L&D): 5-6 days

            Night float: 3 nights 6p - 8a

            Weekend call: 1 day 8a - 8p

            NICU: 1 day


                                                                72
            MFM: 1 afternoon

There are usually two students per service (can range from zero

to four). In addition to the five UM students, there are usually two

students from Wayne State, and one student from University of

Toledo. It is possible to make small changes to your schedule if

necessary (see “Can I change my schedule?”).

Contacts:

     ●      Clerkship Directors

                 ○    Anne Frantz, MD (pager 670 3697) --

                      oversees UM students

                 ○    Joanne Vicari-Block (pager 651 4138) --

                      oversees Wayne and UT students

     ●      Ob-Gyn Coordinator

                 ○    Emily Lawrence -- (phone 712 5171) --

                      contact for all administrative questions




                                                                 73
Employee Health Response Line: For immediate care of body

fluid exposures, notify your resident and dial 23297 or 734 712

3297; listen to instructions; leave your name, what happened, and

call back number; a nurse in employee health services will be

paged automatically and will call you back.



Parking: Park in the patient lot on the day of orientation. You will

receive a parking pass on the first day of orientation that will allow

you to park in lot D. The hospital can also be reached in 20-25

minutes by bicycle starting from the University Hospital. Take the

B2B path along the river until Dixboro Rd, head south on the path

next to Dixboro Rd for ½ mile. A bike rack is conveniently

available in front of the family birthing center, downstairs from the

medical student call room.




                                                                   74
Food: Your St. Joe’s ID card comes charged with $100. On the

1st of the month the card will be reset to a balance of $100. In

the main hospital: the cafeteria is surprisingly good; Joe’s Java

also has bagels, coffee, and sandwiches. In Reichert: another

Joe’s Java has a small selection of pastries, sushi, and coffee.

Nick’s cafe does not accept card swipes. Bring food for night

float.



Medical Records System: St. Joe’s uses PowerChart for

inpatients, paper charts for AOGP clinic patients, and OB

TraceVue for obstetric patients. There is a two hour training

session on PowerChart during orientation. See “Notes” section

for some tips on note writing at SJM. IMPORTANT: medical

students DO NOT have off-site access to the record system, so it

is important to check patient lists and schedules before leaving

the hospital to prepare for the following day.


                                                                   75
Paging: Bring your UM pager, there is a link to UM paging on the

St. Joe’s clinical homepage and the residents know how to page

your UM pager. From within the hospital use the paging link

(WebXchange) on the clinical home page for SJM pagers. Off-

site use www.myairmail.com (sign in: obgynres, password: baby).



Lectures & Conferences

Grand Rounds are Thursday 8a-10a in the Education Center

Auditorium. The department meeting is held on the fourth

Thursday of every month from 8a-9a in the Michigan Heart &

Vascular Institute Auditorium. In addition to your UM lectures,

you will have lectures given by the St. Joe’s attendings and

residents every Thursday from 10a-1p following Grand Rounds. If

on the Ob service during the 2nd Thursday of the month you will

attend the high risk lunch at noon in the Education Center.


                                                                  76
Obstetrics

General: Labor and Delivery is located on the third floor of the

main hospital. Taking the central elevators to the third floor puts

you directly onto the unit. The medical student and resident call

rooms are also located here. There are lockers where you may

store your belongings (bring your own padlock).

Pre-rounding: Arrive by 6a to pre-round on Mother-Baby (3

North). Pick up a patient list from the clerk on L&D. You should

see AOGP patients first (they will be circled on the patient list),

and then see cesarean section patients if time permits. Medical

students should not pre-round on vaginal deliveries unless doing

so on an AOGP patient. Write a “medical student progress note”

similar to a surgical progress note except add: 1) whether patient

is breast or bottle feeding 2) comment on lochia 3) palpate uterus

4) Rh type and 5) rubella status. On cesarean patients, the


                                                                      77
bandage should be removed on POD#1 so that you can inspect

the incision, and staples should be removed on POD#3. Discuss

contraception with AOGP patients, but do not discuss

contraception with non-AOGP patients. Pre-round and have at

least two notes completed by 6:45a so the resident can sign your

note before table rounds.

Table Rounds: Attend table rounds in the L&D conference room

from 7a-8a. If a medical student has seen one or more AOGP

patients during pre-rounds, that student is expected to present

those patients to the team. Medical students do not, however,

present non-AOGP cesarean patients (even if a medical student

has pre-rounded on these patients, they will be presented by the

resident). Students will be assigned one 5-10 min education talk

to be presented during table rounds (you may pick the topic).

During the day: From 8a-5p round on labor patients and scrub

cesarean sections, using the boardroom as your home base.


                                                                  78
Progress notes must be written on every laboring patient every

two hours (see UM section on progress notes). Check the board

for patients on magnesium sulfate, these patients will need a

“mag check” every two hours. A “mag check” consists of the

following:

             S: HA, changes to vision, N/V, URQ abd pain,

             dizziness

             O: heart/lungs/abd exams, check extremities for

             edema, clonus, and reflexes. Note UOP for last 1-2

             hrs. (what the nurse has noted plus volume in the bag).

             A/P: __yo G_ now P_ s/p ____ for _____ etc.

                         -continue mag checks q 2 hr.

                         -continue to monitor blood pressures

It is polite to introduce yourself to the nurse and ask permission to

enter a particular patient’s room. The nurse’s name will be written

in that patient’s box on the board. Once you have met a patient


                                                                  79
you should also write “your name MS” on that patient’s box. Try

to coordinate your visits with the nurse whenever possible.



Gynecology

Rounds start at 7:30a in the Physician Zone (contact resident the

day before starting). The chief will assign patients, though he or

she will often allow you to pick cases that you are interested in.

Whenever possible, introduce yourself to the patient and

attending in pre-op prior to scrubbing. Cases preceded by an “M”

occur in the main OR on the second floor, cases preceded by an

“A” are minor outpatient surgeries performed in Reichert. If you

scrub a major case (an “M”), you are expected to pre-round on

that patient the following morning and write a progress note

(standard surgical note).




                                                                     80
Occasionally there may be slow days. You are expected to stay

until 5p to see consults that may be called in, feel free to sit on the

medical student call room and read. Occasionally you may be

allowed to attend a different service for the day, see “Can I

change my schedule?” for more information.

Students will be assigned one 5-10 min educational talk during

this service (you may pick the topic). Handouts are encouraged,

but not required. Primary literature is appreciated.



Oncology

Schedule varies, check with your resident, but in general:

          Monday: oncology clinic

          Tuesday: surgery

          Wednesday: morning in AOGP clinic, afternoon in

          oncology clinic

          Thursday: oncology clinic


                                                                    81
          Friday: surgery



Important: Because of the variable schedule and because there

is only one student on service at once, a proper handoff to the

next student is important! On your last day, find out what time the

next student should arrive in the morning and get a patient list for

him/her. If for some reason this is not possible you may page the

resident, but they prefer that the students handoff to one another.

If you happen to be on Oncology on a “slow” day your resident

may send you to another service. See “Can I change my

schedule?” for more information.



Night Float & Weekend Call

Night Float: The expectation for Night Float is that you will be

awake and alert all night. Arrive by 6p and expect to stay until 8a.

Nights are covered by one attending, a senior resident, a junior


                                                                   82
resident, an off-service resident (FP or ER), and one medical

student. Nights often present the best opportunity for medical

students to participate in vaginal deliveries! Just like L&D, you

will be writing progress notes, mag checks, and scrub cesarean

deliveries. Medical students may see consults with the senior

resident. You are expected to pre-round at 6a and attend table

rounds at 7a.



Weekend Call: Students are assigned one day of weekend call,

8a-8p. Similar to night float.



Ambulatory (AOGP Clinic)

General: Clinic starts at 8a every day, arrive 5-10 minutes early.

The clinic is located on the second floor of the Reichert Research

Center, adjacent to the residency and clerkship directors’ offices

and the conference room where lectures and orientation are held.


                                                                    83
Because paper charts are used, you are not expected (or able) to

read up on patients the day before. The nurse will distribute a

printed patient list as soon as the residents and attending arrive

and the attending will assign patients for you to see. Patients in

clinic are commonly there for: annual exams, urogyn complaints,

prenatal care, postpartum visits, and post-op visits. Consider

reading on these topics prior to arriving in clinic on the first day.

Always wear professional attire to clinic. Ask where to sit,

residents and attendings have preferred computers!

Maternal Fetal Medicine: One afternoon (Tuesday or Thursday)

while you are on Ambulatory. The office is located at the SW

corner of Clark and Golfside, just outside the SJM campus, walk

SW from Reichert. Page the attending the day before to confirm

(she may have you come in the morning if there are only a few

patients scheduled for the afternoon).




                                                                        84
NICU: One full day on a Wednesday while you are on

Ambulatory. The NICU is down the hall from L&D, toward the

Mother-Baby unit. Arrive at the NICU no later than 8a and tell the

nurse at the front desk that you are scheduled to work with the

pediatricians. You will attend all cesarean sections and vacuum-

assisted deliveries that occur during your shift to evaluate the

neonate. Wear scrubs.



Can I Change My Schedule?

Early in the rotation make copy of the student schedule to post in

call room, it will make life easier for everyone. You may swap

shifts with another student if need be, but be sure to ask

permission from the chief residents involved and e-mail Emily so

she is aware of the change.

From time to time you there will not be many (or any) patients to

care for on a particular service. If this is the case you may be


                                                                   85
sent to another service for the day. If this happens, tread

carefully, use good judgment, and follow these rules:

     ●    Take care that you are not encroaching on other

          students’ experiences. It polite to ask the students on

          the service what activities you can participate in.

     ●    There may never be more than one student on Onc at a

          time.

     ●    Do not go to any service where there are already three

          students.

     ●    Always communicate with the chiefs involved.

     ●    If assigned to Onc and there are no patients, your

          resident may send you to Gyn, in which case you may

          scrub cases not already selected by medical students

          on that service (check with the other students!).

     ●    If assigned to Gyn and there are no patients, your

          resident may send you to Ob, in which case you may


                                                                86
          scrub cesarean sections not attended by students on

          that service (check with the students!). You may also

          assist in triage if there is no student there.

     ●    If assigned to L&D and there are few patients you may

          help the midwives in triage.

     ●    If assigned to Ambulatory, you will likely be sent home

          early.



Writing Notes at St. Joe’s

Per SJM policy, medical students must always write notes using

the medical student templates (found in a drop down menu when

creating a new note). All of the templates will have “Medical

Student Note” in large red font at the top. Officially, you are only

allowed to write admission H&P and progress notes. If you ask

nicely you may be allowed to write a post-op note or delivery note

under the supervision of a resident. Avoid copying previously


                                                                  87
written notes; it is better to create a new note and write from

scratch, though you may use the previous note as a reference.

When writing notes you may refer to the documentation sections

of the UM survival guide.

End of Clerkship

Check-out with Dr. Frantz at any point during the last day. Bring

your “student vote” sheet with the names of the resident and

attending that most contributed to your education. If you lost your

sheet you may write the names on a blank piece of paper. Also

print a copy of your CLTP patient list for Dr. Frantz. At the end of

the day, turn in your ID badge and parking pass to Emily, or at

security, located on the main corridor (1st floor). The security

office will likely be closed, but if you pick up the phone outside the

door someone will be there to assist you shortly.




                                                                   88
USEFUL NUMBERS
OB Numbers
Anesthesia Pager 9016
Charge Nurse Pager 2777
BOARD ROOM 232-7994, 232-7993, 232-7993
WEST CLERK DESK: 232-7999
CENTRAL CLERK DESK: 232-7986
EAST CLERK DESK: 232-7900
OR 1: 232-8921
OR 2: 232-8919
OR 3: 232-8914
OR 4: 232-8915
Triage Phone 764-8134
GYN Numbers
GYN Junior Pager: 0005
ONC Pager: 33189
OB chief 35555
OB juniors 33333/34444
8B Clean Room Code: 1-3-5
8C Clean Room Code: 2&4 together, then 3
8B Conference Room 5-8524
8B Call Room 6-4743
8B Desk 6-4674
8B Fax 3-4076
8C Desk 6-4660
Surgical Observation Unit 6-1153
Main OR Desk 6-8470
Phase II (pre-op) 6-4282
Main OR Anesthesia Pager 8003
Recovery 6-4281
Radiology resident on call (nights and weekends)
1700 plain films, 1800 CT/USN/MRI

                                                   89
      Directions to Frequently Used Locations

Dr. Maya Hammoud’s Office

3rd Floor, Women’s Hospital. L3616

F4834 Mott Hospital (MFM Conference Room)
 th                                                          th
4 Floor, Mott Hospital. Take the West Elevators to the 4 Floor.

Turn right off the elevators and make an immediate right.

Proceed towards the doors and they will open automatically.

Continue down the ramp. Turn left when you reach a door

marked: Once inside, turn right and the F4834 conference room

is on your left. This is also called the MFM conference room.

L4503 Women’s Hospital (Admin Conference Room)
 th                                                                 th
4 Floor, Women’s Hospital. Take the East Elevators to the 4

Floor. At the main hallway off the elevator, turn left. The first

doorway on the right is the hallway to the OBGYN/Admin offices.

You will need to swipe your UMID to gain access before entering.

At the first junction, turn right. Proceed ¾ of the way down this


                                                                         90
hallway. Just before the copy machine on the left is the L4503

conference room. It is the last door on your left.

MCHC Auditorium (F2304 Mott Hospital)
                                   nd
The MCHC Auditorium is on the 2 Floor in the Towsley Triangle.

This is where Towsley, Mott, and Women’s Hospital Meet.

L3113 Women’s Hospital

3rd Floor, Women’s Hospital.

L2020 Women’s Hospital

2nd Floor, Women’s Hospital.

Sheldon Dining Room (Room#G1320)

The Sheldon Dining Room is in the basement of Towsley Center.

If you go to the basement, it is around the corner from the

Sheldon Auditorium entrance.

Med Sci I Auditorium MSI-5330
                            th
This auditorium is on the 5 floor of Med Sci I Building. Take the
                  th
elevators to the 5 Floor.


                                                                 91
2C224-UH (University Hospital)

2C224 is in University Hospital. Take the East Entrance to the

Cafeteria. Turn Right just after the newspaper stand. The Room

will be the second on the right.

CVC 2314 (Danto Auditorium)
                         nd
This is located on the 2 Floor of the new CVC Cardio Vascular

Center. It is located near the Atrium, so follow the signs.

2C108-UH (University Hospital)

2C108 is in University Hospital. If you are at the East Entrance to

the Cafeteria, follow the hallway towards Ford Auditorium. The

Room will be just past the gift shop on the right hand side of the

hallway. This is before you get to Ford Auditorium.

UHB1-H102 (University Hospital)

UHB1-H102 is in University Hospital. Take the UH West elevator

to B1. Exit the elevator area to the left, H102 is on your left just

beyond the new hallway to CVC.


                                                                       92
