An official website of the United States government Here's how you know

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services

OWH Helpline | En Español

What can we help you find?
Subscribe to receive OWH updates

Home

Health and Wellness

Diseases and Conditions

Menstrual Cycle

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)

Reproductive Health

Patient Materials

About Us

Blog

Menstrual Cycle

Premenstrual syndrome
(PMS)

Your menstrual cycle
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
Premenstrual dysphoric
disorder (PMDD)

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a combination of
symptoms that many women get about a week or two
before their period. Most women, over 90%, say they get
some premenstrual symptoms, such as bloating,
headaches, and moodiness.3 For some women, these
symptoms may be so severe that they miss work or
school, but other women are not bothered by milder
symptoms. On average, women in their 30s are most
likely to have PMS.4 Your doctor can help you find ways
to relieve your symptoms.

Period problems
Your menstrual cycle and your
health
Menstrual cycle resources
Ovulation calculator
View A-Z health topics

Collapse All

What is PMS?

Menstrual cycle (PDF, 105 KB)

PMS is a combination of physical and emotional symptoms that many women get after ovulation and before the start
of their menstrual period. Researchers think that PMS happens in the days after ovulation because estrogen and
progesterone levels begin falling dramatically if you are not pregnant. PMS symptoms go away within a few days after
a woman’s period starts as hormone levels begin rising again.

Find a Health Center

Some women get their periods without any signs of PMS or only very mild symptoms. For others, PMS symptoms may
be so severe that it makes it hard to do everyday activities like go to work or school. Severe PMS symptoms may be a
sign of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). PMS goes away when you no longer get a period, such as after
menopause. After pregnancy, PMS might come back, but you might have different PMS symptoms.

Location
Enter a city, ZIP code (such as
20002), address, state, or place

Who gets PMS?

Subscribe
To receive email updates

Enter email

As many as three in four women say they get PMS symptoms at some point in their lifetime.5 For most women, PMS
symptoms are mild.

Submit

Less than 5% of women of childbearing age get a more severe form of PMS, called premenstrual dysphoric disorder
(PMDD).6
PMS may happen more often in women who:
Have high levels of stress7
Have a family history of depression8
Have a personal history of either postpartum depression or depression9,10

Does PMS change with age?

Yes. PMS symptoms may get worse as you reach your late 30s or 40s and approach menopause and are in the
transition to menopause, called perimenopause.11
This is especially true for women whose moods are sensitive to changing hormone levels during the menstrual cycle.
In the years leading up to menopause, your hormone levels also go up and down in an unpredictable way as your body
slowly transitions to menopause. You may get the same mood changes, or they may get worse.
PMS stops after menopause when you no longer get a period.

What are the symptoms of PMS?

PMS symptoms are different for every woman. You may get physical symptoms, such as bloating or gassiness, or
emotional symptoms, such as sadness, or both. Your symptoms may also change throughout your life.
Physical symptoms of PMS can include:12
Swollen or tender breasts
Constipation or diarrhea
Bloating or a gassy feeling
Cramping
Headache or backache
Clumsiness
Lower tolerance for noise or light
Emotional or mental symptoms of PMS include:12
Irritability or hostile behavior
Feeling tired
Sleep problems (sleeping too much or too little)
Appetite changes or food cravings
Trouble with concentration or memory
Tension or anxiety
Depression, feelings of sadness, or crying spells
Mood swings
Less interest in sex
Talk to your doctor or nurse if your symptoms bother you or affect your daily life.

What causes PMS?

Researchers do not know exactly what causes PMS. Changes in hormone levels during the menstrual cycle may play a
role.13 These changing hormone levels may affect some women more than others.

How is PMS diagnosed?

There is no single test for PMS. Your doctor will talk with you about your symptoms, including when they happen and
how much they affect your life.
You probably have PMS if you have symptoms that:12
Happen in the five days before your period for at least three menstrual cycles in a row
End within four days after your period starts
Keep you from enjoying or doing some of your normal activities
Keep track of which PMS symptoms you have and how severe they are for a few months. Write down your symptoms
each day on a calendar or with an app on your phone. Take this information with you when you see your doctor.

How does PMS affect other health problems?

About half of women who need relief from PMS also have another health problem, which may get worse in the time
before their menstrual period.12 These health problems share many symptoms with PMS and include:
Depression and anxiety disorders.These are the most common conditions that overlap with PMS. Depression
and anxiety symptoms are similar to PMS and may get worse before or during your period.
Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Some women report that their symptoms
often get worse right before their period. Research shows that women with ME/CFS may also be more likely to
have heavy menstrual bleeding and early or premature menopause.14
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). IBS causes cramping, bloating, and gas. Your IBS symptoms may get worse
right before your period.
Bladder pain syndrome. Women with bladder pain syndrome are more likely to have painful cramps during PMS.
PMS may also worsen some health problems, such as asthma, allergies, and migraines.

What can I do at home to relieve PMS symptoms?

These tips will help you be healthier in general, and may relieve some of your PMS symptoms.
Get regular aerobic physical activity throughout the month.15 Exercise can help with symptoms such as
depression, difficulty concentrating, and fatigue.16
Choose healthy foods most of the time.17 Avoiding foods and drinks with caffeine, salt, and sugar in the two
weeks before your period may lessen many PMS symptoms. Learn more about healthy eating for women.
Get enough sleep. Try to get about eight hours of sleep each night. Lack of sleep is linked to depression and
anxiety and can make PMS symptoms such as moodiness worse.12
Find healthy ways to cope with stress. Talk to your friends or write in a journal. Some women also find yoga,18
massage,19 or meditation20 helpful.
Don’t smoke. In one large study, women who smoked reported more PMS symptoms and worse PMS symptoms
than women who did not smoke.21

What medicines can treat PMS symptoms?

Over-the-counter and prescription medicines can help treat some PMS symptoms.
Over-the-counter pain relievers you can buy in most stores may help lessen physical symptoms, such as cramps,
headaches, backaches, and breast tenderness. These include:
Ibuprofen
Naproxen
Aspirin
Some women find that taking an over-the-counter pain reliever right before their period starts lessens the amount of
pain and bleeding they have during their period.
Prescription medicines may help if over-the-counter pain medicines don’t work:22
Hormonal birth control may help with the physical symptoms of PMS,12 but it may make other symptoms worse.
You may need to try several different types of birth control before you find one that helps your symptoms.
Antidepressants can help relieve emotional symptoms of PMS for some women when other medicines don’t
help. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs, are the most common type of antidepressant used to
treat PMS.23
Diuretics (“water pills”) may reduce symptoms of bloating and breast tenderness.
Anti-anxiety medicine may help reduce feelings of anxiousness.
All medicines have risks. Talk to your doctor or nurse about the benefits and risks.

Should I take vitamins or minerals to treat PMS symptoms?

Maybe. Studies show that certain vitamins and minerals may help relieve some PMS symptoms. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) does not regulate vitamins or mineral and herbal supplements in the same way they regulate
medicines. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplement.
Studies have found benefits for:
Calcium. Studies show that calcium can help reduce some PMS symptoms, such as fatigue, cravings, and
depression.24,25 Calcium is found in foods such as milk, cheese, and yogurt. Some foods, such as orange juice,
cereal, and bread, have calcium added (fortified). You can also take a calcium supplement.
Vitamin B6. Vitamin B6 may help with PMS symptoms, including moodiness, irritability, forgetfulness, bloating,
and anxiety. Vitamin B6 can be found in foods such as fish, poultry, potatoes, fruit (except for citrus fruits), and
fortified cereals. You can also take it as a dietary supplement.
Studies have found mixed results for:
Magnesium.24 Magnesium may help relieve some PMS symptoms, including migraines. If you get menstrual
migraines, talk to your doctor about whether you need more magnesium.26 Magnesium is found in green, leafy
vegetables such as spinach, as well as in nuts, whole grains, and fortified cereals. You can also take a
supplement.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (omega-3 and omega-6). Studies show that taking a supplement with 1 to 2 grams
of polyunsaturated fatty acids may help reduce cramps and other PMS symptoms.27 Good sources of
polyunsaturated fatty acids include flaxseed, nuts, fish, and green leafy vegetables.

What complementary or alternative medicines may help relieve PMS symptoms?

Some women report relief from their PMS symptoms with yoga or meditation. Others say herbal supplements help
relieve symptoms. Talk with your doctor or nurse before taking any of these supplements. They may interact with
other medicines you take, making your other medicine not work or cause dangerous side effects. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) does not regulate herbal supplements at the same level that it regulates medicines.
Some research studies show relief from PMS symptoms with these herbal supplements, but other studies do not.
Many herbal supplements should not be used with other medicines. Some herbal supplements women use to ease
PMS symptoms include:
Black cohosh.28 The underground stems and root of black cohosh are used fresh or dried to make tea, capsules,
pills, or liquid extracts. Black cohosh is most often used to help treat menopausal symptoms,29 and some women
use it to help relieve PMS symptoms.
Chasteberry .30 Dried ripe chasteberry is used to prepare liquid extracts or pills that some women take to
relieve PMS symptoms. Women taking hormonal birth control or hormone therapy for menopause symptoms
should not take chasteberry.
Evening primrose oil. The oil is taken from the plant’s seeds and put into capsules. Some women report that the
pill helps relieve PMS symptoms, but the research results are mixed.29
Researchers continue to search for new ways to treat PMS. Learn more about current PMS treatment studies at
clinicaltrials.gov.

Did we answer your question about PMS?

For more information about PMS, call the OWH Helpline at 1-800-994-9662 or check out the following resources
from other organizations:
Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) — Information from the American Congress of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
Premenstrual Syndrome — Information from the National Library of Medicine

Sources

1. Freeman, E., Halberstadt, M., Sammel, M. (2011). Core Symptoms That Discriminate Premenstrual
Syndrome. Journal of Women’s Health; 20(1): 29–35.
2. Dennerstein, L., Lehert, P., Bäckström, T.C., Heinemann, K. (2009). Premenstrual symptoms—severity, duration
and typology: an international cross-sectional study. Menopause International; 15: 120–126.
3. Winer, S. A., Rapkin, A. J. (2006). Premenstrual disorders: prevalence, etiology and impact. Journal of
Reproductive Medicine; 51(4 Suppl):339-347.
4. Dennerstein, L., Lehert, P., Heinemann, K. (2011). Global study of women's experiences of premenstrual
symptoms and their effects on daily life. Menopause International; 17: 88–95.
5. Steiner, M. (2000). Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: guidelines for
management. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience; 25(5): 459–468.
6. Potter, J., Bouyer, J., Trussell, J., Moreau, C. (2009). Premenstrual Syndrome Prevalence and Fluctuation over
Time: Results from a French Population Survey. Journal of Women’s Health; 18(1): 31–39.
7. Gollenberg, A.L., Hediger, M.L., Mumford, S.L., Whitcomb, B.W., Hovey, K.M., Wactawski-Wende, J., et al. (2010).
Perceived Stress and Severity of Perimenstrual Symptoms: The BioCycle Study. Journal of Women’s Health; 19(5):
959-967.
8. Endicott, J., Amsterdam, J., Eriksson, E., Frank, E., Freeman, E., Hirschfeld, R. et al. (1999). Is premenstrual
dysphoric disorder a distinct clinical entity? Journal of Women's Health & Gender-Based Medicine; 8(5): 663-79.
9. Richards, M., Rubinow, D.R., Daly, R.C., Schmidt, P.J. (2006). Premenstrual symptoms and perimenopausal
depression. American Journal of Psychiatry; 163(1): 133-7 .
10. Bloch, M., Schmidt, P.J., Danaceau, M., Murphy, J., Nieman, L., Rubinow, D.R. (2000). Effects of gonadal steroids in
women with a history of postpartum depression. American Journal of Psychiatry; 157(6): 924-30.
11. Pinkerton, J.V., Guico-Pabia, C.J., Taylor, H.S. (2010). Menstrual cycle-related exacerbation of disease. American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology; 202(3): 221-231.
12. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2015). Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) .
13. Dickerson, L., Mazyck, P., Hunter, M. (2002). Premenstrual Syndrome . American Family Physician; 67(8): 1743–
1752.
14. Boneva, R. S., Lin, J. M., & Unger, E. R. (2015). Early menopause and other gynecologic risk indicators for chronic
fatigue syndrome in women. Menopause, 22, 826–834.
15. El-Lithy, A., El-Mazny, A., Sabbour, A., El-Deeb, A. (2014). Effect of aerobic exercise on premenstrual symptoms,
haemotological and hormonal parameters in young women. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology; 3: 1–4.
16. Aganoff, J. A., Boyle, G. J. (1994). Aerobic exercise, mood states and menstrual cycle symptoms. Journal of
Psychosomatic Research; 38: 183–92.
17. Kaur, G., Gonsalves, L., Thacker, H. L. (2004). Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: a review for the treating
practitioner. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine; 71: 303–5, 312–3, 317–8.
18. Tsai, S.Y. (2016). Effect of Yoga Exercise on Premenstrual Symptoms among Female Employees in Taiwan. Int J
Environ Res Public Health; 13(7).
19. Hernandez-Reif, M., Martinez, A., Field, T., Quintero, O., Hart, S., Burman, I. (2000). Premenstrual symptoms are
relieved by massage therapy. J Psychosom Obstet Gynaecol; 21(1):9-15.
20. Arias, A. J., Steinberg, K., Banga, A., Trestman, R. L. (2006). Systematic review of the efficacy of meditation
techniques as treatments for medical illness. Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine; 12(8):817-32.
21. Dennerstein, L., Lehert, P., Heinemann, K. (2011). Global epidemiological study of variation of premenstrual
symptoms with age and sociodemographic factors. Menopause International; 17(3): 96–101.
22. Rapkin A. (2003). A review of treatment of premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric
disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology; Suppl 3:39-53.
23. The Medical Letter. (2003). Which SSRI?. Med Lett Drugs Ther; 45(1170):93-5.
24. National Institute for Health Research, U.K. (2008). Dietary supplements and herbal remedies for premenstrual
syndrome (PMS): a systematic research review of the evidence for their efficacy .
25. Ghanbari, Z., Haghollahi, F., Shariat, M., Foroshani, A.R., Ashrafi, M. (2009). Effects of calcium supplement
therapy in women with premenstrual syndrome. Taiwanese Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology; 48(2): 124–129.
26. Office of Dietary Supplements. (2016). Magnesium.
27. Rocha Filho, F., Lima, J.C., Pinho Neto, J.S., Montarroyos, U. (2011). Essential fatty acids for premenstrual
syndrome and their effect on prolactin and total cholesterol levels: a randomized, double blind, placebocontrolled study. Reproductive Health; 8: 2. doi: 10.1186/1742-4755-8-2.
28. Johnson, T. L., Fahey, J. W. (2012). Black cohosh: coming full circle? Journal of Ethnopharmacolgy, 141(3): 775-9.
doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.050.
29. Dietz, B. M., Hajirahimkhan, A., Dunlap, T. L., Bolton, J. L. (2016). Botanicals and their bioactive phytochemicals for
women’s health. Pharmacological Reviews, 68(4): 1026-1073. doi: https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.115.010843 .
30. Girman, A., Lee, R., Kligler, B. (2003). An integrative medicine approach to premenstrual syndrome. American
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 188 (5), S56–S65.

All material contained on these pages are free of copyright restrictions and maybe copied, reproduced, or duplicated without permission of the Office on Women’s
Health in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Citation of the source is appreciated.
Page last updated: February 22, 2021

Return to top

About Us

Programs and Activities

Popular Topics

Find Help

Stay Connected

Who we are

Autoimmune diseases

Get breastfeeding help

Blog

What we do

Health Information
Gateway

Breastfeeding

Get health care

Contact us

Work with us

It's Only Natural

Carpal tunnel syndrome

Get health insurance

Media inquiries

Our vision and mission

Make the Call, Don't Miss
a Beat

Depression

Get help with family
planning

Social media

National Blood Pressure
Awareness Week

Menstruation

HIV and AIDS

National Women and
Girls HIV/AIDS
Awareness Day

Polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS)

National Women's Health
Week

Thyroid disease

Stronger Than
Sarcopenia

Pregnancy

Get help with mental
health
Get vaccines
Find girls' health
information

All A-Z health topics

Supporting Nursing
Moms at Work

Subscribe to receive OWH updates
HHS Non-Discrimination Notice | Language Assistance Available | Accessibility | Privacy Policy | Disclaimers | Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) | USA.gov | Use Our Content
| Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Language Assistance Available
Español | 繁體中⽂ | Tiếng Việt | 한국어 | Tagalog | Руссĸий | ‫يﺔ‬#‫ | اﻟﻌرٮ‬Kreyòl Ayisyen | Français | Polski | Português | Italiano | Deutsch | ⽇本語 | ‫ڡﺎرﺳﯽ‬- | English

A federal government website managed by the Office on Women's Health in the Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Health at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
1101 Wootton Pkwy, Rockville, MD 20852 1-800-994-9662 • Monday through Friday, 9 a.m. to
6 p.m. ET (closed on federal holidays).

