                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 4




View this article online at: patient.info/womens-health/periods-and-period-problems/premenstrual-syndrome


Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS, PMT)
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) can cause various symptoms before periods. In some women the symptoms can badly
affect their quality of life. Various treatment options are available.

Symptoms of PMS are common, but vary considerably in how severe they are. For most women, premenstrual symptoms
may be distressing but do not disrupt normal functioning and quality of life.

PMS can affect women of any age between puberty and the menopause. The term PMS is used when symptoms become
bad enough to disrupt normal functioning and quality of life. Day-to-day life and performance at work can be affected. It
may cause tension with family and friends.


What is premenstrual syndrome (PMS)?
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is the name given for various symptoms you may experience in the weeks before your period.

'Physiological premenstrual symptoms' refers to premenstrual symptoms (eg, abdominal bloating, breast tenderness, headache, acne,
constipation, or mood changes) that do not cause any impairment of activities of daily living or affect quality of life. Up to 9 out of every 10
women having menstrual periods will experience physiological premenstrual symptoms.

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is when symptoms cause significant personal, interpersonal or functional problems

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is used to describe a severe form of PMS.


PMS symptoms
Many different symptoms have been reported. The most common are listed below. You may have just one or two symptoms, or you
may have a number of different symptoms:

Mental (psychological) symptoms
           Tension, irritability.
           Tiredness.
           Feelings of aggression or anger.
           Mood swings.
           Anxiety.
           Loss of confidence.

Alongside emotional symptoms, you may have a change in your sleep pattern, in sexual feelings and in appetite which can affect your
general mental health. Relationships may become strained because of these symptoms.

Physical symptoms
           Swollen or tender breasts.
           Tummy (abdominal) bloating.
           Swelling of the feet or hands.
           Weight gain.
           Increase in headaches.

Behavioural symptoms
           Reduced cognitive ability (thinking, learning, reading, remembering, speaking, listening and paying attention).
           Aggression.

If you have epilepsy, asthma, migraine or cold sores, you may find that these conditions become worse before a period.


What causes PMS?
The cause is not known. It is not due to imbalanced hormone levels, or due to too much or too little of any hormone (as was previously
thought). However, the release of an egg from an ovary each month (ovulation) appears to trigger symptoms. It is thought that women
with PMS are more sensitive to the normal level of progesterone. This hormone is passed into the bloodstream from the ovaries after
you ovulate.
                                                                                                                                  Page 2 of 4

One effect of over-sensitivity to progesterone seems to reduce the level of brain chemicals (neurotransmitters) called serotonin and
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). This may lead to symptoms, and may explain why medicines that increase the level of the brain
chemical serotonin work in PMS.

When does PMS start?
PMS symptoms can start at any age from when periods begin (pubery). They often begin in your mid-20s, but can become worse
between ages 35 and 40.

Within each menstrual cycle, PMS symptoms can vary a great deal in terms of the nature of the symptoms, their severity and how long
they last. However, PMS symptoms typically begin in the week before your period, and last until five or so days after the start of your
period.


How is premenstrual syndrome diagnosed?
There is no test for PMS. The diagnosis of PMS is based on your symptoms.

Sometimes it is difficult to tell if your symptoms are due to PMS, or if they are due to other conditions such as anxiety or depression.
Your doctor may ask you to keep a diary of symptoms over a couple of months. It is when the symptoms occur that indicates PMS, not
just their nature or type.

If you have PMS you may have:

           Symptoms that start sometime after ovulation (when you release an egg from an ovary each month), which occurs about two
           weeks before the start of a period. Typically, symptoms occur during the five days before a period. However, some women
           have symptoms for two weeks or so leading up to a period. Typically, symptoms gradually become worse as the period
           approaches.
           Symptoms that go within three to four days after your period starts.

Symptoms that occur all the time are not due to PMS.


How to reduce PMS symptoms
The following may help:

Read about it
It may help you to understand what is happening. This may relieve some of the anxiety about symptoms. It may be useful to keep a chart
or diary. Note the days you feel irritable, low, or anxious, or have any other symptoms that you feel in your everyday lifethat may be part
of PMS.

See how long symptoms last before a period. Then it may be worth noting in a diary when your periods are due. As you can predict
when your PMS symptoms are likely to occur, you can expect them and be ready for them. For example, it may be possible to avoid
doing important things on the days when symptoms are expected.

Talk about it
Make sure to be honest and talk about it with your family, friends or partner. It may help them to understand how you are feeling. It may
be best to do this after your period when symptoms have eased.

Exercise
Some women who exercise regularly say they have less of a problem with PMS. Try doing some regular exercise several times a week.

Food and drink
Some people claim that various diets help to ease PMS. However, there is little evidence from research trials that this is true. Reducing
the amount of sugar, sugary drinks and refined carbohydrates you eat within a balanced diet before your period may help your
symptoms.

Carbohydrates with a lower glycaemic index give a slower steadier release of sugar, and may be a better choice for some women with
PMS. (eg, granary/wholemeal bread rather than white bread). Smaller more frequent meals may suit better than infrequent large meals.

Reduce caffeine and alcohol intake
Some women find that alcohol or caffeine (found in tea, coffee, cola, etc) makes their symptoms worse. So, it may be worth a trial of not
having alcohol or caffeine prior to periods to see if this helps.


What are the treatment options for premenstrual syndrome?
Many treatments for PMS have been tried over the years. There are very few that have been proven to work. Treatments for PMS may
take a while to work fully. If you start a treatment, try it for several months before deciding if it is helping or not.
                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 4

It can be difficult to remember how things were several months ago. If you keep a diary of symptoms, it will help you to decide if you are
better with treatment than you were before. Treatments may not cure symptoms completely. However, the symptoms often become a
lot easier or less frequent with treatment.

Not treating is an option
Understanding the problem, knowing when the symptoms are coming and planning a coping strategy are all that is required for many
women. Some women find the self-help measures listed above and such things as avoiding stress or doing relaxation exercises prior to
a period can help.

Treatments that you can buy without needing a prescription
Various herbal products, vitamins and minerals are sold for the treatment of PMS. The ones which have been studied most include
magnesium, vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), calcium, and agnus castus. The evidence is mixed and it is not clear yet if they have any effect.
Some studies suggest some of them are helpful, whereas others suggest they are not.

There is not enough evidence yet to know if they can be recommended, and if so, in what dose. They are unlikely to do much harm as
long as you do not exceed the dose suggested on the label, so you may wish to give one or more of these treatments a try.

Evening primrose oil or simple painkillers such as ibuprofen or paracetamol may help with breast tenderness.

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
CBT is a talking treatment (psychological treatment), during which, ways to find more adaptive ways of coping with premenstrual
symptoms are explored. This has been shown to be effective for some women. If it is helpful, it avoids the need for taking medicines,
which may potentially have side-effects, so it is worth considering as an option.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
An SSRI medicine (for example, fluoxetine or citalopram) may be prescribed to treat more severe PMS. These medicines were
developed to treat depression. However, they have also been found to ease the symptoms of PMS, even if you are not depressed. They
work by increasing the level of serotonin in the brain (see above in 'What causes premenstrual syndrome?'). You have a good chance
that symptoms of PMS will become much less if you take an SSRI.

Research suggests that taking an SSRI for just half of the cycle (the second half of the monthly menstrual cycle) is just as effective as
taking an SSRI all of the time. Side-effects occur in some women, although most women have no problems taking an SSRI. There are
various types and brands. Although commonly used for PMS, and licensed for it elsewhere, these medicines are not licensed for PMS
specifically in the UK.

The combined oral contraceptive (COC) pill
In theory, preventing ovulation should help PMS. This is because ovulation, and the release of progesterone into the bloodstream after
ovulation, seems to trigger symptoms of PMS. The COC pill (known as 'the pill') works as a contraceptive by preventing ovulation.

However, pills do not always help with PMS, as they contain progestogen hormones (with a similar action to progesterone). One type of
COC pill contains a progestogen called drospirenone which may not have the downside of other progestogens. (The first of these was
called Yasmin® although there are now other brands with the same hormones.) This may be better than other pills for PMS symptoms,
but research is ongoing.

If you have PMS and require contraception then the pill may be a possible option to use for both effects. If you take the pill, you should
talk to your doctor as they may advise you to take it without having a break between packets, as this may have further benefits.

Oestrogen
Oestrogen given via a patch or gel has been shown to improve symptoms by suppressing egg production. Oestrogen tablets are not
effective though. However, you will also need to take progestogens if you have not had a hysterectomy. These can be taken as tablets or
an intrauterine system (IUS) can be inserted. The doses of oestrogen in a patch are much lower than in the COC pill, so the patch is not
a method of contraception, but the IUS is.

Other treatments
Other methods of suppressing ovulation include medicines called gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues. These medicines are
only used for very severe PMS. They are usually advised by specialists and given by injection and with hormone replacement therapy
(HRT) to protect your bones and prevent symptoms of menopause.

A medicine called danazol is occasionally used by specialists. It may cause side-effects (such as weight gain, excess hair, acne and a
deeper voice) so it is not used very often. It is extremely important to use contraception when taking danazol as it can cross the placenta
and damage the baby if a pregnant woman takes it.

Surgery to remove the womb and both ovaries (hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy) also prevents ovulation and will cure
PMS, although is a drastic option. Because of this, it is only done in the most severe cases where nothing else has helped.
                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 4

What is the outlook (prognosis)?
Women with PMS tend to be affected throughout their reproductive lives, although symptoms usually settle during pregnancy. How
troublesome or otherwise PMS is seems to fluctuate. So there may be times in your life when you are not affected by it, and other times
when it is very severe. It may get worse at certain times - for example, in times of stress.


Further reading & references
             Management of Premenstrual Syndrome; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2016)
             Nevatte T, O'Brien PM, Backstrom T, et al; ISPMD consensus on the management of premenstrual disorders. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2013
             Aug;16(4):279-91. doi: 10.1007/s00737-013-0346-y. Epub 2013 Apr 27.
             Premenstrual syndrome; NICE CKS, 2019 (UK access only)
             Naheed B, Kuiper JH, Uthman OA, et al; Non-contraceptive oestrogen-containing preparations for controlling symptoms of premenstrual syndrome.
             Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Mar 3;3:CD010503. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD010503.pub2.
             Marjoribanks J, Brown J, O'Brien PM, et al; Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013 Jun
             7;6:CD001396. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001396.pub3.
             Lopez LM, Kaptein AA, Helmerhorst FM; Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone for premenstrual syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012
             Feb 15;2:CD006586. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006586.pub4.
             Hofmeister S, Bodden S; Premenstrual Syndrome and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder. Am Fam Physician. 2016 Aug 1;94(3):236-40.

Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton
Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but makes no warranty as to its
accuracy. Consult a doctor or other healthcare professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our
conditions.


   Last updated by:                                                  Peer reviewed by:
   Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP                                              Dr Hayley Willacy, FRCGP

   Last updated:                                                     Next review date:                                     Document ID:
   16/03/2023                                                        07/02/2028                                            4315 (v42)




View this article online at: patient.info/womens-health/periods-and-period-problems/premenstrual-syndrome
Discuss Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS, PMT) and find more trusted resources at Patient.




© Egton Medical Information Systems Limited - All rights reserved.
